# Handling errors

Eventually you'll encounter an error when interacting with an API. You might receive a 4xx or 5xx status code from the server, or your request may not reach the server due to network issues, such as losing connectivity or a failed DNS lookup.

## Network errors

`RestTemplate` alerts an application of any errors by throwing Java exceptions rather than returning error or status codes. This means using `try/catch` blocks.

In the case of general network I/O, errors that prevent the request from reaching the server, like the server being offline, or prevent the response from coming back, like losing your connection, are reflected as a failure to access a resource.

`RestTemplate` throws a `ResourceAccessException` to alert the application that there was a network I/O problem:

```java
try {
    restTemplate.put(API_URL + "users/remove/23");
}
catch (ResourceAccessException e) {
    System.out.println(e.getMessage());
}
```

Since the error is related to the network, the application usually can't resolve the issue unless the error is an invalid URL or a similar configuration issue. Frequently, the only course of action is to report the error and possibly allow the user to retry.

## 4xx and 5xx response codes

Assuming there are no network problems, there are still potential errors that are reflected in the response status code. In an earlier unit, you learned that status codes 200-299 mean success, and 400-599 status codes are for errors.

`RestTemplate` throws a `RestClientResponseException` for any response status code in the 400-599 range:

```java
try {
    restTemplate.delete(API_URL + "users/remove/23");
}
catch (RestClientResponseException e) {
    System.out.println(e.getRawStatusCode());
}
```

`RestClientResponseException` has several useful messages that can clarify and potentially allow the application to understand and correct problems:

| **Method**                | **Description**                                              |
| ------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| getRawStatusCode()        | Returns the raw HTTP status code value                       |
| getStatusText()           | Returns the HTTP status text                                 |
| getResponseHeaders()      | Returns HTTP response headers (may be null)                  |
| getResponseBodyAsString() | Returns HTTP response body converted to String (may be null) |

## Note: What about 1xx and 3xx response status codes?

Even though 1xx status codes are part of the HTTP specification, they are used primarily in traditional web apps. You won't often see one as a response from an API.  
  
Similarly, 3xx codes are typically used by servers that host websites. For example, if a URL changed for a page, the server responds with a `301 Moved Permanently` or `302 Found`. Web APIs, on the other hand, typically don't change endpoints as it may break existing applications.  
  
The main focus of API designers is on simplicity and ease of use. They want application programmers to make use of the services they've created. Forcing application developers to handle 1xx or 3xx response codes complicates their work, and sours their impression and usage of an API.

## Putting it together

Now you know how to handle different types of errors, how do you put these techniques together?

Here, you cascade the `catch` blocks:

```java
try {
    restTemplate.put(API_URL + "users/remove/23");
}
catch (ResourceAccessException e) {
    // Handle network I/O errors
    System.out.println(e.getMessage());
}
catch (RestClientResponseException e) {
    // Handle response status codes 4xx and 5xx
    System.out.println(e.getRawStatusCode());
}
```