# Quiz

**JavaScript Functions 1**

Given the following function definition:

```js
function divideTwo(a, b) {
    return a / b;
}
```

What would be the result of `divideTwo(10, 2)`?

○ `2`

◉ `5`

○ `10`

○ `20`

○ `NaN`

**Explanation:** The parameter `a` has the value `10` and the parameter `b` has the value `2`. The expression `10 / 2` evaluates to `5` which is the value that's returned.

---

**JavaScript Functions 2**

Parameters in JavaScript functions are always optional.

◉ True

○ False

**Explanation:** Any parameters not specified receive the value `undefined`.

---

**JavaScript Functions 3**

Select each of the letters where `name` would be in scope if you added a line of code there:

```js
let ages = [14, 12, 16];
// a.
ages.forEach( (age) => {
    // b.
    let name = 'Little Johnny';
    // c.
    console.log(`${name} is ${age} years old.`);
    // d.
});
// e.
```

	Select all correct options

□ a

□ b

■ c

■ d

□ e

**Explanation:** A variable declared with `let` is in scope from that point to the end of the block.

---

**JavaScript Functions 4**

Select each of the letters where `word` would be in scope if you added a line of code there:

```js
let sentences = paragraph.split('.');

sentences.forEach( (sentence) => {
    // a.
    sentence.split(' ').forEach( (word) => {
        // b.
        console.log(word);
    });
    // c.

    console.log("Finished a sentence.");
    // d.
});
// e.
```

	Select all correct options

□ a

■ b

□ c

□ d

□ e

**Explanation:** A parameter for an anonymous function is only in scope within the body of that function.

---

**JavaScript Functions 5**

Given the following function definition:

```js
function add( a = 0, b = 0 ) {
    return a + b;
}
```

What would be the result of calling `add(2)`?

○ `0`

◉ `2`

○ `4`

○ `NaN`

○ causes an error

**Explanation:** The parameter `a` has the value `2` and the parameter `b` has the value `0`. The expression `2 + 0` evaluates to `2` which is the value that's returned.

---

**JavaScript Functions 6**

Arrange the JSDoc lines in the order they would normally appear to document this function:

```js
function countLargeNumbers(numbers, threshold) {
    return numbers.reduce((count, num) => {
        return count + (num > threshold? 1 : 0);
     }, 0);
}
```

▤ `/**`

▤ `* Counts how many numbers in an array are greater than a specified threshold.`

▤ `* @param {Array} numbers - values to consider`

▤ `* @param {number} threshold - values greater than this are "large"`

▤ `* @returns {number} count of large numbers`

▤ `*/`

**Explanation:** JSDoc normally describes the function, then its parameters, and then its return value.

---

**JavaScript Functions 7**

Anonymous functions are functions that:

○ Can't be called more than once

○ Can't ever be called like a named function

◉ Don't have names when first created

○ Don't have parameters

**Explanation:** You define an anonymous function without a name. You can then pass it to another function or give it a name.

---

**JavaScript Functions 8**

What would be the value of `filteredArray` after running the following code:

```js
let theArray = [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9];
let filteredArray = theArray.filter( (element) => { return element % 2 === 0; } );
```

○ `[2]`

○ `[4]`

◉ `[2, 4, 6, 8]`

○ `[1, 3, 5, 7, 9]`

○ `[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]`

**Explanation:** The expression `element % 2 === 0` evaluates to `true` when `element` is an even number, and the `filter()` method returns an array containing the elements for which the function passed to it returns `true`.