# What's polymorphism?

In this unit, you'll learn about the last principle of object-oriented programming: polymorphism.

> _The word polymorphism, derived from the Greek language, means "the ability to have multiple forms."_
> 
> _In object-oriented programming, polymorphism is the idea that something can be assigned a different meaning or usage based on its context. This specifically allows variables and objects to take on more than one form._

Here's an analogy to help you understand this term. Suppose someone told you, "go to the store and buy your favorite food for dinner."

What happens next depends on some context:

-   If you were 14 years old, you might ride your bike to the store and use the cash in your pocket to pay for a pizza and a 2-liter bottle of soda pop.
-   As an adult, you might **_drive to the store_** and using the credit card in your wallet, pay for pecan chicken and wine.

In both cases, the person making the request said the same thing: "go to the store and buy your favorite food for dinner." However, the result differed depending on the subject receiving the request.

Often, you want to write code that can make a basic request, and based on context, allow different behaviors to take place. Polymorphism means you can write one generic method call that uses whatever specific version of that method is appropriate when it runs.

As you'll see, polymorphism supports code extensibility. If you write polymorphic code, you have generic code that avoids being tied to the details of a particular object's class. This allows programmers to incorporate changes through new object types in the system without modifying existing code.

---

# Polymorphism and inheritance

Recall that in the last unit, you added subclasses that inherit from the `Clock` class:

```java
public class Clock {
    private int hour;
    private int minute;
    private int second;

    public void setTime(int hour, int minute) {
        this.hour = hour;
        this.minute = minute;
        this.second = 0;
    }

    /* ... */
}

public class GrandfatherClock extends Clock {
    /* ... Grandfather Clock implementation */
}

public class CuckooClock extends Clock {
    /* ... Cuckoo Clock implementation */
}

public class AlarmClock extends Clock {
    /* ... Alarm Clock implementation */
}


```

Suppose you needed to create a `Shopkeeper` class whose responsibility is to reset all of the different clocks to 7 AM:

```java
public class Shopkeeper {

    public void setTime(GrandfatherClock clock) {
        clock.setTime(07, 00); // Set a grandfather clock to 7 o'clock
    }

    public void setTime(CuckooClock clock) {
        clock.setTime(07, 00); // Set a cuckoo clock to 7 o'clock
    }

    public void setTime(AlarmClock clock) {
        clock.setTime(07, 00); // Set an alarm clock to 7 o'clock
    }
}
```

Do you notice a _code smell_ here? You're adding a method for every type of `Clock`. Your code is _tightly coupled_. When you want to add a new `Clock` type, you have to add a new `setTime()` method for it as well.

>✔ Tip: Be wary of code smells
>
>A **code smell** is any symptom in the program that indicates there may be a deeper problem, violation of fundamental design principles, or an impact to design quality. Here are some [common code smells](https://blog.codinghorror.com/code-smells/) :
>
>-   Duplicate code
>-   Conditional complexity
>-   Long methods

**Polymorphic code** allows you to take advantage of the fact that your different clock classes—`AlarmClock`, `GrandfatherClock`, and `CuckooClock`—have an **_is-a_** relationship with a `Clock`.

Given that `AlarmClock`, `GrandfatherClock`, and `CuckooClock` are subclasses of `Clock`, you can write a single function that accepts a reference to a `Clock` while allowing any class that inherits from it too:

```java
public class Shopkeeper {

    public void setTime(Clock clock) {
        clock.setTime(07, 00);    // Set any clock to 7 o'clock
    }
}
```

Now you've written **_loosely coupled code_**. The `Shopkeeper` doesn't differentiate between the different clocks when it comes to setting time. Think about it—how many times have you said "go reset that cuckoo clock to 7 o'clock?" Realistically, you're likely to point at the cuckoo clock and say "go reset that clock to 7 o'clock."

The `Shopkeeper` class is now only dependent on `Clock`. If you add a new class that inherits from `Clock`, like a `Watch`, the code in your `Shopkeeper` class has no reason to change:

```java
public class Watch extends Clock {
    /* ... Watch implementation */
}
```

>🛈 Note: Polymorphism and inheritance
>
>With respect to inheritance, polymorphism means **_if B is a subclass of A and a function can accept A as a parameter, then it can also accept B_**.

---

# Polymorphism by capabilities

Say that you wanted your shopkeeper to be able to set an alarm. It doesn't make sense for them to set an alarm on a grandfather clock or a cuckoo clock, but it does make sense to set it on an alarm clock. While you're at it, you also need the shopkeeper to set the alarm on their phone.

You'll add the method directly to the `AlarmClock` class since the alarm feature doesn't apply to all clocks. You also need a separate `Phone` class that has support for setting an alarm:

```java
public class AlarmClock extends Clock {

    public void setAlarm(int hour, int minute) {
        /* implementation for set alarm method on alarm clock*/
    }

}

public class Phone {

    public void setAlarm(int hour, int minute) {
        /* implementation for set alarm method on phone */
    }
}
```

When you add the ability for the `Shopkeeper` class to set the alarm, you need to set up two separate methods again:

```java
public class Shopkeeper {

    public void setAlarm(AlarmClock clock) {
        clock.setAlarm(08, 00); // set the alarm on the alarm clock to 8 o'clock
    }

    public void setAlarm(Phone phone) {
        phone.setAlarm(08, 00); // set the alarm on the phone to 8 o'clock
    }
}
```

This is similar to the situation you were in before. Neither of these classes appear to share anything in common other than the fact that they both can have an alarm set.

>🛈 Warning: Don't force inheritance
>
>You might think adding inheritance is a quick fix to avoid duplicating code, but be careful. If you can't use the phrase "is-a" when talking about two different types, it isn't a good fit. It doesn't make sense to have `Phone` inherit from `AlarmClock`. You wouldn't say "a phone **_is an_** alarm clock."

In reality, you also interact with different objects based on **_what they can do_** (their **_capabilities_**) and not **_what they are_**. With code, you can use something called an **interface** to indicate what a type can do and reference the object by that. The next lesson describes interfaces and how to use them.

---

# Interfaces

In Java, interfaces require classes to implement public methods that can be used in a specific way. Interfaces provide you with a way to say what classes can do and as such are an alternative way to define an **_is a_** relationship.

The following code shows how to define an interface:

```java
public interface Alarmable {
    void setAlarm(int hour, int minute);
}
```

In the definition of the interface, there's no implementation for the methods. There's only a method declaration with no body and no access modifier. That's what an interface is: a declaration of one or more public methods.

After definition, classes implement those interfaces. Think of an interface as a contract. If a class wishes to implement an interface, it must agree to provide implementations for all methods defined by the interface:

```java
public class AlarmClock extends Clock implements Alarmable {

    public void setAlarm(int hour, int minute) {
        /* implementation for set alarm method on alarm clock*/
    }

}

public class Phone implements Alarmable {

    public void setAlarm(int hour, int minute) {
        /* implementation for set alarm method on phone */
    }
}
```

A class, if necessary, can implement more than one interface. For example, suppose there's also a `Textable` interface which describes the capability to send and receive SMS messages. `Phone` can implement both interfaces:

```java
public class Phone implements Alarmable, Textable {
    ...
```

In this case, `Phone` needs to provide code for all of the methods defined in both the `Alarmable` and `Textable` interfaces.

>🛈 Warning: Interface instantiation
>
>Interfaces don't get instantiated. In other words, you can't use the `new` operator on an interface. You can only use the `new` operator on a class which **_implements_** the interface.

Now that you've defined the interface, it's available as a data type that you can use to reference an existing object. In this sense, you can adjust the `Shopkeeper` class and eliminate the duplicate methods by programming the `setAlarm()` method against an interface and not the concrete classes:

```java
public class Shopkeeper {

    // setAlarm() accepts any object that implements the Alarmable interface
    public void setAlarm(Alarmable alarm) {
        alarm.setAlarm(08, 00); // set the alarm to 8 o'clock
    }
}
```

>🛈 Note: Polymorphism and interfaces
>
>With respect to interfaces, polymorphism means **_if B is a class that implements interface A and a function can accept A as a parameter, it can also accept B_**.

---

# Unit summary

In this unit, you learned:

-   What polymorphism is and how it's useful when writing software
-   How to use inheritance to write polymorphic code
-   How to use interfaces to write polymorphic code

---

# Quiz

## **Polymorphism 1**

**Polymorphism allows you to write code that's more ________.**

○ specific

◉ generic

**Explanation:** If you write polymorphic code, you have generic code that avoids being tied to the details of a particular object's class.


## **Polymorphism 2**

**What would be displayed by the `main` method of the `Demo` class?**

```java
// #####################
// Car.java
// #####################
public class Car {
    public String getFuelType() {
        return "gasoline";
    }
}

// #####################
// ElectricCar.java
// #####################
public class ElectricCar extends Car {
    @Override
    public String getFuelType() {
        return "electricity";
    }
}

// #####################
// HybridCar.java
// #####################
public class HybridCar extends Car {
    @Override
    public String getFuelType() {
        return "gasoline and electricity";
    }
}

// #####################
// Demo.java
// #####################
public class Demo {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Car[] cars = {new HybridCar(), new ElectricCar()};
        Car myCar = cars[1];
        System.out.println("My car runs on " + myCar.getFuelType());
    }
}
```

◉ My car runs on electricity

○ My car runs on gasoline

○ My car runs on gasoline and electricity

**Explanation:** The variable `myCar` references an object of type `ElectricCar`, so the `getFuelType()` method in that class is used. That's polymorphism, made possible in this case by inheritance.


## **Polymorphism 3**

**What must a class do to fulfill the "contract" of an interface?**

○ Inherit the interface

○ Instantiate the interface

◉ Implement the interface

**Explanation:** A class that implements an interface provides implementations for the methods of that interface.


## **Polymorphism 4**

**A class can implement more than one interface.**

◉ True

○ False

**Explanation:** A class can only inherit from one other class, but it can implement any number of interfaces.


## **Polymorphism 5**

**When an interface method has no access modifier, it is ___________.**

◉ public

○ private

○ protected

○ static

**Explanation:** If no access modifier is given, the method is implicitly `public`. It's permitted, but discouraged as a matter of style, to redundantly specify the `public` modifier for a method declaration in an interface.


## Polymorphism 6**

**What would be displayed by the `main` method of the `Demo` class?**

_(Pay attention to spelling, capitalization, and spaces)_

```java
// #####################
// Greeting.java
// #####################

public interface Greeting {
      String getGreeting();
}

// #####################
// English.java
// #####################

public class English implements Greeting {
    public String getGreeting() {
        return "Hello!";
    }
}

// #####################
// French.java
// #####################

public class French implements Greeting {
    public String getGreeting() {
        return "Bonjour!";
    }
}

// #####################
// Spanish.java
// #####################

public class Spanish implements Greeting {
    public String getGreeting() {
        return "Hola!";
    }
}

// #####################
// Demo.java
// #####################

public class Demo {

    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Greeting[] greetings =
            new Greeting[] { new French(), new English(), new Spanish() };

        for(Greeting g : greetings ) {
            System.out.print( g.getGreeting() + " " );
        }
    }
}
```

**Answer:** Bonjour! Hello! Hola!

**Explanation:** The objects referenced by the `greetings` array are each an instance of a different class, so a different `getGreeting()` method is used for each. That's polymorphism, made possible in this case by an interface.


## **Polymorphism 7**

**Select the statement below that's true.**

```java
// ################################################
// Shape.java
// ################################################

public interface Shape {
    double getArea();
    double getPerimeter();
}

// ################################################
// Rectangle.java
// ################################################

public class Rectangle implements Shape {
    private double length;
    private double width;

    public Rectangle(double length, double width) {
        this.length = length;
        this.width = width;
    }

    public double getArea() {
        return length * width;
    }
}
```

○ `Shape.java` won't compile successfully

◉ `Rectangle.java` won't compile successfully

○ Both files compile successfully

**Explanation:** `Rectangle.java` won't compile successfully because the `Rectangle` class doesn't implement the `getPerimeter()` method of the `Shape` interface.


## **Polymorphism 8**

**Select all of the following that are examples of interfaces:**

	Select all correct options

□ ArrayList

■ Map

□ String

■ List

□ HashMap

**Explanation:** `Map` and `List` are frequently used interfaces in the Java standard library.
