# Polymorphism by capabilities

Say that you wanted your shopkeeper to be able to set an alarm. It doesn't make sense for them to set an alarm on a grandfather clock or a cuckoo clock, but it does make sense to set it on an alarm clock. While you're at it, you also need the shopkeeper to set the alarm on their phone.

You'll add the method directly to the `AlarmClock` class since the alarm feature doesn't apply to all clocks. You also need a separate `Phone` class that has support for setting an alarm:

```java
public class AlarmClock extends Clock {

    public void setAlarm(int hour, int minute) {
        /* implementation for set alarm method on alarm clock*/
    }

}

public class Phone {

    public void setAlarm(int hour, int minute) {
        /* implementation for set alarm method on phone */
    }
}
```

When you add the ability for the `Shopkeeper` class to set the alarm, you need to set up two separate methods again:

```java
public class Shopkeeper {

    public void setAlarm(AlarmClock clock) {
        clock.setAlarm(08, 00); // set the alarm on the alarm clock to 8 o'clock
    }

    public void setAlarm(Phone phone) {
        phone.setAlarm(08, 00); // set the alarm on the phone to 8 o'clock
    }
}
```

This is similar to the situation you were in before. Neither of these classes appear to share anything in common other than the fact that they both can have an alarm set.

>**🛈 Warning: Don't force inheritance**
>
>You might think adding inheritance is a quick fix to avoid duplicating code, but be careful. If you can't use the phrase "is-a" when talking about two different types, it isn't a good fit. It doesn't make sense to have `Phone` inherit from `AlarmClock`. You wouldn't say "a phone **_is an_** alarm clock."

In reality, you also interact with different objects based on **_what they can do_** (their **_capabilities_**) and not **_what they are_**. With code, you can use something called an **interface** to indicate what a type can do and reference the object by that. The next lesson describes interfaces and how to use them.
