# Conditional code

There are many different choices available to programmers who want their code to take various paths based on a `true` or `false` condition.

The most common approach developers use to allow their code to take various paths is `if`, `if/else`, or `if/else if/else`.

With each of the following examples, any usage of the word `condition` can be replaced by a boolean variable or a more complex boolean expression evaluated from comparison and logical operators.

## Single conditions with `if`
The format for an `if` condition follows:

```java
if (condition) {
    statement or block performed if condition is true
}
```

## Two paths with `if/else`
The format for an `if/else` condition follows:

```java
if (condition) {
    statement or block performed if condition is true
} else {
    statement or block performed if condition is not true
}
```

## Warning: Don't add conditions for else
Notice that there's no condition after the else keyword. You don't need to add a condition because `else` always executes if the condition in the `if` section is `false`.

## Multiple paths using `if/else if/else`
If you need to provide more than two paths for the code to take, you can use an `if/else if` code branch. With the `if/else if`, each time you write `if`, you need to supply an additional condition that indicates if the following code block should run.

Once Java runs into the first true condition, it executes the following block of code. After that block, the program resumes after the last conditional block:

```java
if (condition) {
    statement or block you do if the first condition is true
} else if (other condition) {
    statement or block you do if the first condition is false
    and the second condition is true
} else if (other condition 2) {
    statement or block you do if the first two conditions are false
    and the third condition is true
} else {
    statement or block you do if all the above conditions are false
}
```

## Tip: Else not required
The `else` isn't required. It's only useful if you want a default option if all the conditions before it are `false`.

When chaining multiple `if/else if` blocks, make sure to put your most exclusive option first. Programs stop at the first condition they find to be true. If there are less exclusive options first, then there is a risk that the code block you thought would run does not. Consider the classic FizzBuzz problem which has programmers return 'Fizz' if a number is divisible by 3, 'Buzz' if the number is divisible by 5, and 'FizzBuzz' if the number is divisible by 3 and 5.

```java
int n = 15;

if (n % 5 == 0) {
  // Fizz
} else if (n % 3 == 0) {
  // Buzz
} else if (n % 3 == 0 && n % 5 == 0) {
  // FizzBuzz
}
```

The program never finds FizzBuzz. As soon as `15 % 5 == 0` is evaluated and true, the remaining conditions are never evaluated and the result is Fizz.

## Choosing between two values
There's another conditional operator that acts like an if statement but is used to select between two different values. This operator is called a **Ternary Operator**. It looks like this:

```java
conditional ? true_value : false_value
```

This may look odd at first, but this `if` shorthand is helpful when formatting data to print to a user.

The way the ternary operator works is that first the condition is checked. If the condition is true, the operator returns the value after the `?`, but if it's false, it returns the value after the `:`. You won't use this often, but it's useful in these situations:

```java
int numOfBananas = ...;
String message = "We have " + numOfBananas + " banana" + (numOfBananas != 1 ? "s" : "");
```

This puts an "s" on "banana" if there's more than one banana.