# Quiz

**DAO Pattern 1**

Put the Java data access layers in order from highest to lowest.

▤ JDBC Driver

▤ Database

▤ Spring JDBC

▤ JDBC

---

**DAO Pattern 2**

The Java language doesn't come with an implementation of the `DataSource` interface.

○ True

○ False

---

**DAO Pattern 3**

Which of the following classes is provided by Spring JDBC for executing SQL statements and returning results?

○ `PreparedStatement`

○ `Statement`

○ `JdbcTemplate`

○ `SqlRowSet`

---

**DAO Pattern 4**

What value would be inserted into the `last_name` column by the following code snippet?

```java
JdbcTemplate jdbcTemplate = new JdbcTemplate(dataSource);

String sqlCreatePerson = 
    "INSERT INTO person(middle_name, last_name, first_name) VALUES (?, ?, ?)";

jdbcTemplate.update(sqlCreatePerson, "Stevie", "Ray", "Vaughan");
```

○ Stevie

○ Ray

○ Vaughan

○ Stevie Ray Vaughan

---

**DAO Pattern 5**

The database username and password are required in the connection string.

○ True

○ False

---

**DAO Pattern 6**

Assuming an `employee` table with the following columns:

| **Name**    | **Type** |
| ----------- | -------- |
| employee_id | SERIAL   |
| firstname   | VARCHAR  |
| lastname    | VARCHAR  |
| date_hired  | DATE     |
| hourly      | BOOLEAN  |

Identified any incorrect instance variables in the `Employee` class.

```java
public class Employee {

    // Instance variables
    private String employeeID;
    private String fullname;
    private LocalDate dateHired;
    private boolean hourly;

    // Assume appropriate getters and setters

}
```

	Select all correct options

□ `String employeeId`

□ `String fullname`

□ `LocalDate dateHired`

□ `boolean hourly`

□ There are no incorrect instance variables

---

**DAO Pattern 7**

What are the features of object-oriented programming that the DAO Pattern relies upon?

	Select all correct options

□ Polymorphism

□ Inheritance

□ Encapsulation

□ Abstraction

---

**DAO Pattern 8**

Put the following steps for submitting SQL using Spring JDBC in the correct order.

▤ Bind `DataSource` to `JdbcTemplate`

▤ Submit SQL `String` using `JdbcTemplate`

▤ Handle values returned by submission

▤ Create `DataSource`

▤ Assign SQL statement to a `String` variable

---

**DAO Pattern 9**

Assuming an `employee` table with the following columns:

| **Name**    | **Type** |
| ----------- | -------- |
| employee_id | SERIAL   |
| firstname   | VARCHAR  |
| lastname    | VARCHAR  |
| date_hired  | DATE     |
| hourly      | BOOLEAN  |

What's the correct way to pull out the value of `lastname` column from a returned `SqlRowSet` named `results`?

○ `results.pullString("lastname")`

○ `results.getVarChar("lastname")`

○ `results.getString("lastname")`

○ `results.pullVarChar("lastname")`

---

**DAO Pattern 10**

Typically you use a `while` to handle a `SqlRowSet` containing multiple rows.

```java
while (results.next()) {
    // Handle a row from the SqlRowSet
}
```

Select reasons why you may want to use an `if` or `if-else` instead.

	Select all correct options

□ Handle the first row only

□ Include additional conditions to boolean expression

□ Test at least one row returned

□ Special processing if zero rows returned