# Constants

A **constant** is like a variable, except its value can never be changed. In other words, its value is **_constant_**. A constant is useful in programming to make your code more maintainable and readable.

Imagine you have code that calculates the sales tax for a customer's order in the state of California. Sales tax rates don't change that often, so you might decide that the sales tax rate can't be changed while the program runs. So, you declare it a constant:
```java
final double CA_SALES_TAX_RATE = 7.25;
```

Declaring a constant differs from declaring a variable in three ways.

First, you declare constants with the word `final` before the data type. This signals to the compiler that this value is a constant and can't be changed. Your code won't compile if you try to change the value of a constant after it's declared.

Second, you **_must_** assign a value to the constant at the time you declare it. Since the compiler won't allow you to change the value after creating the constant, the value must be set in the declaration.

Third, you write names for constants in all uppercase with underscores separating the words. This signals to other developers that this value is a constant. Your code can compile if the name isn't formatted that way, but it's considered a best practice to do so in Java.

>**🛈 Note: What does immutable mean?**
>
>Constants are often referred to as being **immutable** or having **immutability**. This term means that something can't be changed.
The opposite term is **mutable**, which means something that **_can_** be changed. Variables are mutable.

## Maintainable code
In the sales tax example, imagine that the sales tax rate changed from 7.25% to 7.75%. If your code didn't use a variable or constant for sales tax, you'd have to go through every line of code and replace `7.25` with `7.75`.

This can be a very error-prone process as you might accidentally replace it with the wrong value—like `7.5` instead of `7.75`—or worse, if there was already a typo, you might not find it when you have to change the sales tax. If there's another `7.25` in the code, it might not even be the sales tax and replacing it can break something else.

By defining the sales tax as a constant, you'd only need to change one line of code:
```java
final double CA_SALES_TAX_RATE = 7.75;
```

## Readable code
In the sales tax example, it's clear that `CA_SALES_TAX_RATE` refers to the California sales tax rate. If your code didn't use a variable or constant for sales tax, it might not be clear to another developer what `7.25` refers to.

Consider the following code where two variables, `days` and `seconds`, are declared and used later in an arithmetic expression:
```java
int days = 2;
int seconds = 40;

// many lines of code later...

int numberOfHoursAwake = 24 * days;
int numberOfFrames = 24 * seconds;
```

Although `24` is the same number in both statements, they have different meanings. `24` refers to both the number of hours in a day and the number of frames per second. Reading this code for the first time, you might not know what `24` refers to and might assume they both represent the same thing.

In this example, `24` is a **magic number**. A magic number is a value whose meaning is unknown or is based upon its context.

When writing a program, you're encouraged to use constants instead of magic numbers so other programmers don't have to figure out what `24` means. Using a constant allows you to give the number a name so you can reference it throughout your code.

Using that same idea, consider the following code that uses constants to indicate the meaning of `24`:
```java
int days = 2;
int seconds = 40;
final int NUMBER_OF_HOURS_PER_DAY = 24;
final int NUMBER_OF_FRAMES_PER_SECOND = 24;

// many lines of code later...

int numberOfHoursAwake = NUMBER_OF_HOURS_PER_DAY * days;
int numberOfFrames = NUMBER_OF_FRAMES_PER_SECOND * seconds;
```

Now it's more clear what each statement means and how the variable values are being calculated.
