# Quiz

Server-Side APIs (Part 2) 1

Which of the following technologies are typically associated with REST?

	Select all correct options

□ HTML

□ JSON

□ HTTP

□ Java

---

Server-Side APIs (Part 2) 2

What are the four basic data operations of CRUD?

○ Construct, Recall, Upgrade, Destroy

○ Change, Remove, Use, Deserialize

○ Compile, Replicate, Upload, Distribute

○ Create, Retrieve, Update, Delete

---

Server-Side APIs (Part 2) 3

What represents a "resource" in the context of REST APIs?

○ URL

○ HTTP method

○ JSON

○ A web browser

---

Server-Side APIs (Part 2) 4

Which HTTP method and URL conforms best with REST conventions to retrieve post 313?

○ `POST /blogs/posts?id=313`

○ `GET /blogs/posts/313`

○ `POST /blogs/posts/id/313`

○ `GET /blogs/posts/{313}`

---

Server-Side APIs (Part 2) 5

Which HTTP method and URL conforms best with REST conventions to add a comment to post 87?

○ `POST /blogs/posts/87/comments/1`

○ `POST /blogs/posts/87/comments`

○ `PUT /blogs/posts/87/comments`

○ `POST /blogs/posts/comments/87`

---

Server-Side APIs (Part 2) 6

What category of status codes identifies that the client made an error in calling the server?

○ `5xx`

○ `4xx`

○ `3xx`

○ `2xx`

---

Server-Side APIs (Part 2) 7

Where do you add Bean Validation annotations?

○ Controller

○ View

○ Model

○ Database

---

Server-Side APIs (Part 2) 8

For the following `update()` method, what's the correct mapping annotation to have the method respond to a `PUT` request?

```java
// missing annotation here
public Product update(@RequestBody Product product, @PathVariable int id) {
    // ...
}
```

○ `@RequestMapping(path = "/products", method = RequestMethod.PUT)`

○ `@RequestMapping(path = "/products/{id}", method = RequestMethod.PUT)`

○ `@RequestMapping(path = "/products/id", method = RequestMethod.PUT)`

○ `@RequestMapping(path = "/products/{product}", method = RequestMethod.PUT)`

---

Server-Side APIs (Part 2) 9

What annotation do you add to the request handler to have a status code of `204` returned, indicating there is nothing returned in the body of the response?

```java
// missing annotation here
@RequestMapping(path = "/{id}", method = RequestMethod.DELETE)
public void delete(@PathVariable String id) {
    // ...
}
```

○ `@ResponseStatus(HttpStatus.NO_CONTENT)`

○ `@RequestMapping(HttpStatus.NO_CONTENT)`

○ `@ResponseStatus(HttpStatus.GONE)`

○ `@RequestMapping(HttpStatus.GONE)`