# Introduction

Over the past several units, you've learned what databases are and how to work with them. You can add, update, read, and delete data. You know what tables, rows, and columns represent. In addition, you understand that tables can be related to one another using primary and foreign keys.

Furthermore, you've learned that databases do more than store and retrieve data; they also protect the integrity of that data, principally through enforcing referential integrity. It's time to take your first steps into designing and creating databases.

Here are the primary activities of a developer who designs and implements a database:

1.  **Data modeling**: the process of clearly and precisely defining the data items to store. Both their purpose and use must be defined. This develops a relational data model.
    
2.  **Logical design**: the process of creating a design that follows the rules of the relational data model.
    
3.  **Physical design**: the process of adjusting the logical design to meet requirements related to performance, ease of use, and hardware and software relational database management system (RDBMS) limitations. This includes defining the data types for the columns and how much room to use to store the data.
    
4.  **Physical implementation**: the process of creating tables and supporting objects such as sequences, indexes, views and aliases, and granting user access on the tables or columns.
    

There are additional activities that have to do with the long-term administration of a running database. These lie outside the scope of this unit, but they include:

-   Monitoring access
-   Performing periodic backups
-   Performance enhancements such as reorgs and validity checking
-   Adjusting and creating indexes
-   Granting and revoking privileges in the database

These activities are generally assigned to a Database Administrator.