# The browser event model

Browser events work in what's commonly called a **Publish and Subscribe** manner. Publish and Subscribe is a programmatic way to pass messages between different parts of a system while keeping those different parts decoupled from each other, meaning that the parts don't have to know about each other, they just need to know which messages to watch out for.

**Publishing** means that parts of the system can send messages out for other parts to act on, and **Subscribe** means that a part can listen for certain messages to be published and perform logic in response to it.

Back to a browser example: when a user clicks on a link, the UI can publish, or "trigger", a "click" event on that link. Another part of the browser can subscribe to, or "listen" for, that event and load the link as a new page.

This is called an **event-driven interface**. Most GUI applications follow this model in some way or another. With this model, you don't run your program's logic from start to finish, but you do write your program to listen for user-triggered events, and then run a small piece of logic in response to it. That logic can range anywhere from adding a class to a table row to saving a form full of user data to a backend system.

## Where do events happen?

In the browser, events are always attached to DOM elements. You can listen to events on links, buttons, input elements, tables, table rows and any other DOM element on the page.

When you want to listen for an event in your JavaScript, you first need to select the DOM element that you want to listen for events on. Then, you attach a function to that DOM element that you want triggered when the event happens.

## What are the events?

When an event is triggered, that event might have some information that gets sent along with it. If it's a mouse event, you'll get the X and Y coordinates of where it happened. If it's a keyboard event, you'll get the key that was pressed. This information can allow you to create powerful user interface interactions with your JavaScript.