# Special cases

Here are a few things to keep in mind as you work with event handlers in your code.

## Bubbling and propagation

A single event doesn't just trigger on one element. It actually triggers on many elements, if you let it.

When an event triggers, it's triggered on the element that has been clicked or changed first. The browser runs any event listeners on that element, but then it doesn't stop there.

The browser then goes to that element's parent and triggers the event there too. This process is called **event propagation** or event bubbling. The browser continues to do this, triggering the event on up the parent tree until it gets to the `window` object that's the super parent of all the elements.

This is useful because there might be an instance where you want to handle events at different levels of the DOM tree. For instance, imagine that there's a table of rows that each have a text field in them. If a text field gets a `focusin` event, you might want to highlight that field:

```js
let textboxes = document.querySelectorAll('input.textboxes');
textboxes.forEach( (element) => {
    element.addEventListener('focusin', (event) => {
        // Here event.currentTarget is the input textbox
        toggleMarkClass(event.currentTarget);
    });
});
```

But you also might want to highlight the entire row by adding a `mark` class to that row. You could do that in the text field's event handler, but it would be much more flexible to do that in an event handler for the rows.

Since any `focusin` event that's triggered on the text box eventually bubbles up to the row level, you can add a `focusin` event handler on the row:

```js
let rows = document.querySelectorAll('table tr');
rows.forEach( (element) => {
    element.addEventListener('focusin', (event) => {
        /*
         * Here event.currentTarget is the row
         * even though the `focusin` event will initially
         * trigger on an input element in that row
         */
        toggleMarkClass(event.currentTarget);
    });
});
```

>🛈 Tip: Use the correct target property
>
>Because of event propagation, every Event object has two properties that deal with target elements:
>
| **Property**  | **Purpose**                                                                                                                                                       |
| ------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| target        | Holds the element that the event was originally triggered on, like the button clicked or the select box that changed                                              |
| currentTarget | Holds the element that the event listener was registered on. This could be the same element as target, or an element up the parent tree from the original target. |

What if you don't want an event to keep bubbling up? To stop the propagation of an event, you can call the `stopPropagation()` method of the event object:

```js
let textboxes = document.querySelectorAll('input.textboxes');
textboxes.forEach( (element) => {
    element.addEventListener('focusin', (event) => {
        // Here event.currentTarget is the input textbox
        toggleMarkClass(event.currentTarget);

        // This stops the event here and does not call the event on any
        // parent element
        event.stopPropagation();
    });
});
```

### Further reading

You can read more about event propagation on this page from SitePoint: [Event Propagation and Bubbling](https://www.sitepoint.com/event-bubbling-javascript/) .

## Where to add event listeners

As mentioned in the previous unit, the DOM isn't created until the browser reads in the HTML. The timing of this isn't guaranteed, so your JavaScript could load and run before the DOM is fully ready.

But to attach event listeners to DOM elements, you need to be able to select elements from the DOM. Trying to get DOM elements from the DOM before the DOM is ready causes errors at run time.

To make sure that the DOM is fully ready before you attach your event listeners, you can listen for an event.

When the DOM is fully loaded into a browser, the browser itself triggers an event called `DOMContentLoaded` on the `document` object. What you need to do is add all of your event listeners inside of an anonymous function that only runs once the `DOMContentLoaded` event is fired:

```js
document.addEventListener("DOMContentLoaded", () => {
    // Register all of your event listeners here
});
```

### What about elements that are created and aren't yet on the DOM?

Often you'll create a new DOM element yourself or from a `template` and want some of its elements to have event handlers on them. Those elements don't exist when the page is loaded in the browser, so any registering of events in `DOMContentLoaded` won't happen for those new elements.

In that case, you'll need to attach those events after creating the DOM elements. This is typically done by writing a new function that takes the new DOM element and attaches the required event handlers. Then, after creating a new element, you pass it to the new function and then add that element to the living DOM.

## Default behavior for `a` and `form` elements

Some events triggers a browser's "default behavior." This includes `a` elements, where a browser attempts to navigate to new page by default when they're `click`ed, and `form` elements, where a browser calls a remote server by default when they're `submit`ted.

However, the browser always calls your JavaScript listeners before doing the default action. This gives you the ability to prevent the default action if you don't want it to happen. This is useful if you want to use `a` elements to toggle something on the page instead of navigating off of the site.

To do this, you need to use the `event` object that you get in your event listener and call `preventDefault()` on it:

```js
aLink.addEventListener('click', (event) => {
    // Tells the browser to not perform its normal action
    event.preventDefault();

    // Then call the event handler
    toggleImage(event.currentTarget);
});
```

## `change` behavior on select and text controls

A `change` event only triggers once the action to make the change has completely finished and only happens after the field itself has blurred _and_ the value has actually changed.

For text input elements, `change` events only trigger once you click or tab out of the box, and then only if you actually change the value that was in the box. If you click in and then click out of the box, there's no change event. If you change a value and then change it back to what it was before clicking out, there's no change event.

This is something to be aware of depending on what kind of functionality you want.

For select elements, `change` events trigger when the user selects a new option. So this event won't wait for a blur event. It'll trigger right away when a new option is selected. However, it still won't trigger if the user selects the same option that was already picked.

## Unit testing with events

You don't usually unit test events triggering. You can, but you'll find yourself doing integration testing rather than unit testing. However, you can use named functions for your event handlers and then you can test your named functions like you always have.