# Quiz

**Networking and HTTP 1**

`.com`, `.net`, `.gov` are all examples of:

○ Port

◉ Top-level domain

○ Fragment

○ Protocol

**Explanation:** The top-level domain (TLD) is the last part of a domain in a URL.

---

**Networking and HTTP 2**

In the example URL below, what part is the query string?

https://www.example.com/catalog?itemid=232&qty=5

○ `/catalog`

○ `https`

○ `www`

◉ `itemid=232&qty=5`

**Explanation:** Query strings are key-value pairs separated by `&` that are sometimes used for dynamically generated pages. They immediately follow the `?`.

---

**Networking and HTTP 3**

What do you know about the following URL? (select all that apply)

https://www.example.com:443/search?q=rugby

	Select all correct options

□ The server it connects to is located in California.

■ The request is encrypted from the browser to the server.

■ The browser connects to that server on port 443.

■ The browser sends information to the server, namely the value "rugby" with the key "q."

□ The browser connects to the server at IP address 12.1.62.201.

**Explanation:** 
-   Since the URL has `https` as the protocol, the connection is encrypted from the browser to the server being connected to.
-   The port is defined as 443 in the URL. However, since the protocol is `https`, the browser defaults to connecting to port 443 anyway.
-   The query string after the `?` in the URL is how the browser sends information to the server, and it's a name/value pair of `q=rugby`.

---

**Networking and HTTP 4**

What's the service that allows computers to find IP addresses from URLs?

○ HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP)

○ HyperText Markup Language (HTML)

◉ Domain Name System (DNS)

○ Transport Layer Security (TLS)

**Explanation:** The Domain Name System (DNS) is the service that connects domains to IP addresses.

---

**Networking and HTTP 5**

`GET`, `POST`, `PUT`, and `DELETE` are examples of:

◉ HTTP request methods

○ Response status codes

○ Network protocols

○ HTTP headers

**Explanation:** HTTP request methods indicate the action that a client wants to perform.

---

**Networking and HTTP 6**

You received HTTP status code `403` from a Web API. You know that:

○ Any data sent was saved to the server.

◉ Some sort of error occurred.

○ The request was successful.

○ The server is redirecting to another URL.

**Explanation:** 4XX codes are client errors and specifically, `403` means "Forbidden."

---

**Networking and HTTP 7**

You got the following data from an API. What format is this?

```json
{
    "color": "black",
    "category": "hue",
    "type": "primary",
    "code": {
        "rgba": [255,255,255,1],
        "hex": "#000"
    }
}
```

○ XML

○ SOAP

◉ JSON

○ HTML

**Explanation:** This format is JavaScript Object Notation (JSON).