# Introduction

Writing tests is an important aspect of any software development, and DAOs are no exception. However, writing tests for DAOs is more complicated because DAOs depend on a database. Tests that involve outside dependencies are **integration tests**, and in this unit you'll learn how they're similar to and different from the unit tests you're already familiar with. You'll also learn how mock data and transactions enable you to write DAO tests that are reliable and effective.

---

# Integration testing

**Integration testing** is a broad category of tests that validate the integration between units of code, or between code and outside dependencies such as databases or network resources. What you've previously learned about unit testing still applies, but there are also some factors that make integration tests different from the tests you've written before.

## Similarities to unit tests

Just like unit tests, good integration tests are reliable, independent, and obvious:

-   **Reliable** (or repeatable): if a test passed or failed once, it continues to return the same result, assuming no code changes.
-   **Independent**: a test can run independently of other tests, and tests don't interact with one another.
-   **Obvious**: when a test fails, it's clear why it failed.

Integration tests also follow the same _Arrange-Act-Assert_ pattern:

-   **Arrange**: begin by arranging the conditions of the test, such as setting up test data.
-   **Act**: perform the action of interest—meaning, the thing you're testing.
-   **Assert**: validate that the expected outcome occurred by means of an assertion—typically an assertion that a method returned the expected value.

The code for your integration tests is also very similar to what you've written before, because you use the same JUnit testing framework.

## How are integration tests different?

One difference is the speed of the tests. Accessing an external resource, like a database, slows down integration tests. They don't run as quickly as unit tests for a method with no outside dependencies. However, in many cases you won't notice the difference, since the execution speed of integration tests is often still a matter of milliseconds. This can be a significant factor, however, in scenarios where many integration tests need to run or the external resource is particularly slow.

Another difference is the complexity involved in the setup for the tests. You often don't need to do much in the arrange step of a unit test beyond creating an instance of the class you're testing. Integration tests, on the other hand, typically require a more elaborate configuration of the test environment. For DAO testing, this means providing mock data for the DAO to access.

---

# Mock data

The various methods of a DAO retrieve or modify data in a database. This presents a challenge when testing these methods. You don't know what results to have your tests expect unless you know the current state of the database. A standard approach to solving this problem is to provide mock data for your DAO tests rather than having your tests use the same database the application uses. Using mock data eliminates ambiguity and allows you to define exactly what data is available to the DAO.

## Providing a `DataSource`

There are a wide variety of tools and technologies available for supplying the mock data as a temporary database that only exists while the DAO tests are running. The details of those tools are beyond the scope of this unit, but the temporary database of mock data has the same interface and data structure as the database used by the application. In other words, nothing needs to change about the DAO to make it work with the mock data.

The previous unit used an example JDBC DAO implementation with this constructor:

```java
public JdbcAuthorDao(DataSource dataSource) {
    jdbcTemplate = new JdbcTemplate(dataSource);
}
```

Passing the `DataSource` as a parameter to the DAO constructor means the DAO tests can pass the `DataSource` for the mock data rather than the `DataSource` used in production. Typically, you create an instance of the DAO you're testing in a method of the test class with the `@Before` annotation so it runs before each test:

```java
@Before
public void setup() {
    sut = new JdbcAuthorDao(mockDataSource); //sut = System Under Test
}
```

## SQL and the `resources` folder

One way to define the mock data is as a SQL file that creates all the tables used by the DAO and populates them with just enough data for the tests. In a Spring Boot application, that file is typically stored in the `src/test/resources` folder.

For example, if you were testing the `JdbcAuthorDao` you could create a SQL file like this:

```java
CREATE TABLE author (
    author_id serial,
    first_name varchar(20) NOT NULL,
    last_name varchar(30) NOT NULL,
    CONSTRAINT PK_author PRIMARY KEY (author_id)
);

INSERT INTO author (first_name, last_name)
VALUES ('FirstA', 'LastA'); --author_id will be 1 due to serial

INSERT INTO author (first_name, last_name)
VALUES ('FirstB', 'LastB'); --author_id will be 2 due to serial
```

By using this SQL file to create the temporary database, you can write DAO tests with the knowledge that there are exactly two authors in the database with the following properties:

| **author_id** | **first_name** | **last_name** |
| ------------- | -------------- | ------------- |
| 1             | FirstA         | LastA         |
| 2             | FirstB         | LastB         |

>**🛈 Note: Remember that the testing database is temporary**
>
>The database containing the mock data doesn't exist when the tests aren't running. If you want to add or change the mock data initially provided to the tests, you make those changes in the SQL file.

---

# Transactions

It's important that DAO tests are independent of each other. This means, for example, that one test calling a DAO method that deletes records in the temporary database won't change how many records DAO methods called in other tests can access. To achieve this independence, you restore the temporary database to its original state after each test. That way, in every test, the DAO has the same data to work with.

To restore the database after each test, you use a **transaction**. Starting a transaction before a test runs and rolling back the transaction after it's completed ensures the changes a test makes to the database only last for the duration of that individual test.

## `setAutoCommit()` and `rollback()`

By default when you run SQL using Spring's `JdbcTemplate`, the `DataSource` commits your changes automatically. You can change that behavior using the `setAutoCommit()` method of the `DataSource`:

```java
dataSource.setAutoCommit(false);
```

With auto commit turned off, you can discard any changes you make to the database by calling the `rollback()` method of the `Connection` property of the `DataSource` like this:

```java
dataSource.getConnection().rollback();
```

When writing DAO tests, you typically do that in a method of the test class with the `@After` annotation so it happens after each test:

```java
@After
public void rollback() throws SQLException {
    mockDataSource.getConnection().rollback();
}
```

---

# Testing DAO methods

DAOs normally perform the CRUD operations (Create, Read, Update, Delete). While each DAO may have features that make it unique, there are basic patterns you can apply when testing the methods associated with those operations.

All of the following examples are tests for methods in [the example DAO in the previous unit](https://learn-2.galvanize.com/content_link/gitlab.com/te-curriculum/data-persistence-using-spring-jdbc-lms/01_Data_Access_and_DAO/05-dao-pattern.md) .

## Read

You test read methods by retrieving the mock data you defined in the temporary database:

```java
@Test
public void getAuthor_returns_correct_author_for_id() {
    Author author = sut.getAuthor(1);
    Assert.assertEquals("FirstA", author.getFirstName());
    Assert.assertEquals("LastA", author.getLastName());

    author = sut.getAuthor(2);
    Assert.assertEquals("FirstB", author.getFirstName());
    Assert.assertEquals("LastB", author.getLastName());
}
```

## Create

You test create methods by adding new data and verifying you can retrieve it:

```java
@Test
public void createAuthor_returns_author_with_id_and_expected_values() {
    Author newAuthor = new Author();
    newAuthor.setFirstName("TestFirst");
    newAuthor.setLastName("TestLast");

    Author createdAuthor = sut.createAuthor(newAuthor);

    int newId = createdAuthor.getAuthorId();
    Author retrievedAuthor = sut.getAuthor(newId);

    Assert.assertEquals(newAuthor.getFirstName(), retrievedAuthor.getFirstName());
    Assert.assertEquals(newAuthor.getLastName(), retrievedAuthor.getLastName());
}
```

## Update

You test update methods by changing mock data and verifying you can retrieve the changed data:

```java
@Test
public void updated_author_has_expected_values_when_retrieved() {
    Author authorToUpdate = sut.getAuthor(1);

    authorToUpdate.setFirstName("UpdatedFirst");
    authorToUpdate.setLastName("UpdatedLast");

    sut.updateAuthor(authorToUpdate);

    Author retrievedAuthor = sut.getAuthor(1);
    Assert.assertEquals(authorToUpdate.getFirstName(), retrievedAuthor.getFirstName());
    Assert.assertEquals(authorToUpdate.getLastName(), retrievedAuthor.getLastName());
}
```

## Delete

You test delete methods by deleting mock data and verifying it's no longer retrievable:

```java
@Test
public void deleted_author_cant_be_retrieved() {
    sut.deleteAuthor(2);

    Author retrievedAuthor = sut.getAuthor(2);
    Assert.assertNull(retrievedAuthor);
}
```

## Using objects and comparison methods

The preceding examples use an `Author` object with two properties and compare those properties one-by-one. However, you'll likely work with more complex data structures, and copying the same assertions to multiple tests can become cumbersome and violates the **Don't Repeat Yourself** principle.

It's common to use constant objects of the same classes your application uses and methods that compare each property of an object to another.

Using the read test example, that might appear as:

```java
private static final Author AUTHOR_A = new Author(1, "FirstA", "LastA");
private static final Author AUTHOR_B = new Author(2, "FirstB", "LastB");

@Test
public void getAuthor_returns_correct_author_for_id() {
    Author author = sut.getAuthor(1);
    assertAuthorsMatch(AUTHOR_A, author);

    author = sut.getAuthor(2);
    assertAuthorsMatch(AUTHOR_B, author);
}

private void assertAuthorsMatch(Author expected, Author actual) {
    Assert.assertEquals(expected.getFirstName(), actual.getFirstName());
    Assert.assertEquals(expected.getLastName(), actual.getLastName());
}
```

---

# Unit summary

In this unit, you've learned:

-   What integration testing is and how it differs from the unit testing you've done before.
-   How mock data and transactions enable you to know exactly what data a DAO can access when writing DAO tests.
-   Basic patterns to use when testing the most common kinds of DAO methods.