# Integration testing

**Integration testing** is a broad category of tests that validate the integration between units of code, or between code and outside dependencies such as databases or network resources. What you've previously learned about unit testing still applies, but there are also some factors that make integration tests different from the tests you've written before.

## Similarities to unit tests

Just like unit tests, good integration tests are reliable, independent, and obvious:

-   **Reliable** (or repeatable): if a test passed or failed once, it continues to return the same result, assuming no code changes.
-   **Independent**: a test can run independently of other tests, and tests don't interact with one another.
-   **Obvious**: when a test fails, it's clear why it failed.

Integration tests also follow the same _Arrange-Act-Assert_ pattern:

-   **Arrange**: begin by arranging the conditions of the test, such as setting up test data.
-   **Act**: perform the action of interest—meaning, the thing you're testing.
-   **Assert**: validate that the expected outcome occurred by means of an assertion—typically an assertion that a method returned the expected value.

The code for your integration tests is also very similar to what you've written before, because you use the same JUnit testing framework.

## How are integration tests different?

One difference is the speed of the tests. Accessing an external resource, like a database, slows down integration tests. They don't run as quickly as unit tests for a method with no outside dependencies. However, in many cases you won't notice the difference, since the execution speed of integration tests is often still a matter of milliseconds. This can be a significant factor, however, in scenarios where many integration tests need to run or the external resource is particularly slow.

Another difference is the complexity involved in the setup for the tests. You often don't need to do much in the arrange step of a unit test beyond creating an instance of the class you're testing. Integration tests, on the other hand, typically require a more elaborate configuration of the test environment. For DAO testing, this means providing mock data for the DAO to access.