# Mock data

The various methods of a DAO retrieve or modify data in a database. This presents a challenge when testing these methods. You don't know what results to have your tests expect unless you know the current state of the database. A standard approach to solving this problem is to provide mock data for your DAO tests rather than having your tests use the same database the application uses. Using mock data eliminates ambiguity and allows you to define exactly what data is available to the DAO.

## Providing a `DataSource`

There are a wide variety of tools and technologies available for supplying the mock data as a temporary database that only exists while the DAO tests are running. The details of those tools are beyond the scope of this unit, but the temporary database of mock data has the same interface and data structure as the database used by the application. In other words, nothing needs to change about the DAO to make it work with the mock data.

The previous unit used an example JDBC DAO implementation with this constructor:

```java
public JdbcAuthorDao(DataSource dataSource) {
    jdbcTemplate = new JdbcTemplate(dataSource);
}
```

Passing the `DataSource` as a parameter to the DAO constructor means the DAO tests can pass the `DataSource` for the mock data rather than the `DataSource` used in production. Typically, you create an instance of the DAO you're testing in a method of the test class with the `@Before` annotation so it runs before each test:

```java
@Before
public void setup() {
    sut = new JdbcAuthorDao(mockDataSource); //sut = System Under Test
}
```

## SQL and the `resources` folder

One way to define the mock data is as a SQL file that creates all the tables used by the DAO and populates them with just enough data for the tests. In a Spring Boot application, that file is typically stored in the `src/test/resources` folder.

For example, if you were testing the `JdbcAuthorDao` you could create a SQL file like this:

```java
CREATE TABLE author (
    author_id serial,
    first_name varchar(20) NOT NULL,
    last_name varchar(30) NOT NULL,
    CONSTRAINT PK_author PRIMARY KEY (author_id)
);

INSERT INTO author (first_name, last_name)
VALUES ('FirstA', 'LastA'); --author_id will be 1 due to serial

INSERT INTO author (first_name, last_name)
VALUES ('FirstB', 'LastB'); --author_id will be 2 due to serial
```

By using this SQL file to create the temporary database, you can write DAO tests with the knowledge that there are exactly two authors in the database with the following properties:

| **author_id** | **first_name** | **last_name** |
| ------------- | -------------- | ------------- |
| 1             | FirstA         | LastA         |
| 2             | FirstB         | LastB         |

>**🛈 Note: Remember that the testing database is temporary**
>
>The database containing the mock data doesn't exist when the tests aren't running. If you want to add or change the mock data initially provided to the tests, you make those changes in the SQL file.