# Strings

The first object to discuss is objects from the `String` class. To create a new `String` object, use the `"` syntax.

```java
String myName = "Xiang";
```

Earlier, you learned that new objects are created with the `new` keyword, but strings are special because they're frequently used. So, Java allows you to create new `String` objects with the `"` literal.

In the previous example, the code creates a new `String` object with the contents of `"Xiang"` on the Heap and assigns its address to the newly declared `myName` variable.

The `myName` variable now acts like a handle on the actual object. You can access the object's methods by using the dot `(.)` operator.

```java
int lengthOfTheString = myName.length();
```

There are other useful methods to look at for strings.

## Length

`length()` returns the number of characters in the string:

```java
String name = "Alexi";
int lengthOfName = name.length(); // lengthOfName is set to 5
```

## Substring

The `substring()` method gets a small subset of an existing string. The parameters are:

1.  The index to start the substring.
2.  An optional index to end the substring. If not given, it goes to the end of the string.

```java
String fullName = "Jaylen Jones";
String firstName = fullName.substring(0, 6); // <- Will equal "Jaylen"
String lastName = fullName.substring(7); // <- Will equal "Jones"
```

## Contains

The `contains()` method checks if a string contains another string. The parameter is the string to search for:

```java
String fullName = "Jaylen Jones";
boolean hasJaylenInIt = fullName.contains("Jaylen"); // Will equal true
```

## Starting and ending

The `startsWith()` and `endsWith()` methods work like the `contains()` method, but they only check if the string starts or ends with the given parameter:

```java
String fullName = "Jaylen Jones";
boolean endsWithJones = fullName.endsWith("Jones"); // Will equal true
```

## Index of

The `indexOf()` method looks through a string, finds the first occurrence of another string. It returns the index the string was found at, or `-1` if it's not found:

```java
String name = "Jaylen Jones";
int firstJFound = name.indexOf("J"); // Will return 0
int firstLetterOfJones = name.indexOf("Jones"); // Will return 7
int firstSmithFound = name.indexOf("Smith"); // Will return -1
```

## Replace

The `replace()` method returns a new string where all occurrences of a given string are replaced with another string:

```java
String name = "Jaylen Jones";
String nameWithReplacements = name.replace("Jaylen", "Jordan");
    // nameWithReplacements will equal "Jordan Jones"
    // name will still equal "Jaylen Jones"
```

## Note: Immutability

`String` objects are immutable. Immutable means that it's impossible to change its value once it's created. Using the `replace()` method always creates a new `String` object.

## Comparing two strings

`equals()` and `equalsIgnoreCase()` are two methods that compare the current `String` object to a `String` object parameter and return true or false. `equals()` only returns true if the characters are exactly the same. `equalsIgnoreCase()` ignores whether a letter is upper or lower case:

```java
String name = "Jaylen";
String otherName = "jaylen";
boolean isExactlyTheSame = name.equals(otherName); // Will be false
boolean isCloseToTheSame = name.equalsIgnoreCase(otherName); // Will be true
```

## Splitting and joining strings

`split()` and `String.join()` are two methods, one that turns a string into an array, and one that turns an array of strings back into a single string.

Both of these methods use a delimiter, which is a character or set of characters that mark different sections of a string:

```java
String fullString = "Chandra;Lakshmi;Madhu;Sri";
String[] separateNames = fullString.split(";");
    // separateNames will contain ["Chandra", "Lakshmi", "Madhu", "Sri"]
String togetherNames = String.join(",", separateNames);
    // togetherNames will equal "Chandra,Lakshmi,Madhu,Sri"
```

## Converting to lower and upper case

`toLowerCase()` and `toUpperCase()` return a new string with the contents lower or upper-cased:

```java
String name = "jOse";
String lowered = name.toLowerCase(); // Will be "jose"
String uppered = name.toUpperCase(); // Will be "JOSE"
```