# Integrated development environment (IDE)

In the early days, programmers wrote applications on punch cards. One line of code, one punch card. The cards were stacked horizontally in cardboard trays. Keeping the cards unbent and in order was extremely important.

When the application was ready, the tray was carried to the jobs desk where the application would be scheduled, and eventually run. The turnaround time between submitting a job and getting results could be anywhere from minutes to days, depending upon the availability of the computer and the priority of the application. It was a slow and tedious process.

Thankfully, programming has changed since then. Over time, programmers have been able to leverage improvements in hardware and software to make their work easier and more manageable. Text editors were developed so programmers could write the code on screens and not on punch cards. Early languages like Basic and Pascal were given programming environments with built-in capabilities tailored for each language.

Additionally, as programming transformed from programmers working alone and into broader team efforts, tools to share and communicate were created. Eventually, all these things were brought together into a single tool called an **integrated development environment** (IDE).

In general, IDEs share several common features.

## Projects
All of the resources of an application, including its source code, tests, libraries, and other types of files like sounds and images are gathered into a folder on the local hard drive known as the project folder, or **project** for short.

There's other information related to a project that's tracked by the IDE, such as the language version, build settings, and links to external resources. The IDE maintains this information in the **project settings**.

The IDE displays resources in a tree structure with the project as the root of the tree. You navigate between the various resources the same way you do in the Windows File Explorer. When you click on a specific resource, the contents of the resource are displayed in an editor or viewer depending upon its type.

Basic copy, move, addition, and deletion of resources is typically available. Changes to the contents of resources, copies, moves, additions, and deletions of the resources are tracked as changes to the project and recorded in a version control system if one is present.

## Language-specific enhancements
Perhaps one of the most appreciated features of an IDE is the assistance when working with source code.

### Syntax highlighting
**Syntax highlighting** displays text in different colors and fonts to help programmers quickly identify and understand the various parts of code. In addition to making code more readable, syntax highlighting is often used to point out the location of errors. Some examples include a misspelled keyword or a mismatched pair like an opening parenthesis without a closing parenthesis.

### Intelligent code completion
Intelligent code completion, often called **IntelliSense**, is a language-aware code completion feature. It provides suggested bits of code that can either be ignored or accepted by the programmer as they type. IntelliSense can help to increase programmer productivity while significantly reducing typos and other common mistakes.

## Note: IntelliSense
Technically, "IntelliSense" is Microsoft's version of intelligent code completion included in Visual Studio (an IDE) and other Microsoft products.

In addition to these features, many IDEs offer a number of extras such as debugging tools to track down and fix problems, refactoring tools to improve code quality, connection management to services such databases, and profiling tools to identify performance bottlenecks.