# Selecting DOM Elements

To create a truly dynamic web application, you'll need to know how to change the DOM after your page has loaded.

When you interact with the DOM, you can do things like add new elements, hide existing elements, even move or change elements. Things like that help you create dynamic user experiences.

For example, if you've ever ordered something online, the website might have had separate forms for your shipping and billing information, with a checkbox to indicate the information was the same so you didn't need to type the same information again. When you selected that checkbox, it filled out your information in the second form, and maybe hid it from view too. That feature was possible because JavaScript interacted with the DOM.

JavaScript has many built-in functions that you can use to manipulate the DOM. The next section contains a list of the most commonly used functions.

## `getElementById()`

The first function you'll learn about is `getElementById()`. This function gets a single HTML element from the DOM and returns a reference to it.

Imagine that you have the following HTML:

```html
<h1 id="title">Welcome</h1>
```

You can select that from the created DOM with this code:

```js
let titleElement = document.getElementById('title');
```

>**⚠ Warning: IDs on elements must be unique**
>
>If you haven't been doing it already, start making all IDs unique in your code. There must never be more than one element on a page with the same ID. As you start to use more functions in JavaScript that rely on element IDs, you'll understand why.
>
>If there's more than one element on the page that has the same ID, the `getElementById()` function returns the first element it finds with the requested ID.

## `querySelector()`

`querySelector()` is for selecting single elements that don't have an ID. `querySelector()` takes a standard CSS selector and returns the _first_ element it finds that matches that selector.

For instance, imagine that you have the following HTML:

```html
<ul id="todo-list">
    <li class="todo">Walk the dog</li>
    <li class="todo">Mow the lawn</li>
    <li class="todo">Go shopping</li>
</ul>
```

You can select the _first_ list item by calling `querySelector()` with the `.todo` selector:

```js
let firstListItem = document.querySelector('.todo');
```

You can also call `querySelector()` on any element, and it searches within that element. That means you could do the same thing with this:

```js
let todoList = document.getElementById('todo-list');
let firstListItem = todoList.querySelector('.todo');
```

That would be helpful if you used the `todo` class elsewhere, and you want to narrow your selection down to the `todo-list`.

>**✔ Tip: What's the difference between querySelector('#id') and getElementById('id')?**
>
>You could use either, but using `querySelector()` to select on an ID is much slower than calling `getElementById()`. If you only need to get a single element and it has an ID, it's best to use `getElementById()`. Use `querySelector()` for selecting single elements without IDs.

## `querySelectorAll()`

If you want to get _all_ of the list items, you can use `querySelectorAll()` instead. This returns a `NodeList` of all the elements, which you can use as an array:

```js
let allListItems = document.querySelectorAll('.todo');
```

Like `querySelector()`, you can use this to select inside another element:

```js
let todoList = document.getElementById('todo-list');
let allListItems = todoList.querySelectorAll('.todo');
```

You can loop through the `NodeList` and access items like you can with an array:

```js
for (let i = 0; i < allListItems.length; i++) {
  console.log(allListItems[i]);
}
```