# Quiz

**DOM 1**

The structure of the DOM is a:

○ stack

○ list

◉ tree

○ set

**Explanation:** The DOM tree is a hierarchical arrangement of parent and child nodes.

---

**DOM 2**

You can see an accurate representation of the DOM in:

○ any text editor

◉ developer tools in a browser

○ HTML files

○ JavaScript files

**Explanation:** A browser's developer tools provide an interactive view of the current state of the DOM.

---

**DOM 3**

Displaying user input with `innerHTML` is dangerous because:

○ `innerHTML` replaces other content and child items

◉ the user could inject malicious JavaScript into your page

○ the user could add new nodes to the DOM

○ the user could style their own input with CSS

**Explanation:** It's dangerous to take user input and use `innerHTML` to put it into an element. A malicious user can use this to perform what's called a **Cross Site Scripting** attack, or XSS.

---

**DOM 4**

True or False: After the browser creates the DOM, JavaScript can change it at any time.

◉ True

○ False

**Explanation:** By using JavaScript to manipulate the DOM, you can do things like add new elements, hide existing elements, even move or change elements. Things like that help you create dynamic user experiences.

---

**DOM 5**

Which of the following statements gets a reference to the first `li` in the list?

```css
<ul id="numbers">
    <li id="one">One</li>
    <li id="two">Two</li>
    <li id="three">Three</li>
</ul>
```

○ `document.querySelectorAll('li')`

◉ `document.querySelector('li')`

○ `document.getElementById('li')`

○ `ul.innerHTML`

**Explanation:** `querySelector()` is for selecting single elements that don't have an ID. `querySelector()` takes a standard CSS selector and returns a reference to the first element it finds that matches that selector.

---

**DOM 6**

Which of the following statements is another way to get a reference to the first `li` in the list?

```css
<ul id="numbers">
    <li id="one">One</li>
    <li id="two">Two</li>
    <li id="three">Three</li>
</ul>
```

○ `document.createElement('li')`

○ `document.querySelectorAll('li')`

◉ `document.getElementById('one')`

○ `document.getElementById('numbers')`

**Explanation:** `getElementById('one')` gets a reference to the first `li` since it's the element with the id `one`.

---

**DOM 7**

Which of the following statements returns a list of the `li` elements?

```css
<ul id="numbers">
    <li id="one">One</li>
    <li id="two">Two</li>
    <li id="three">Three</li>
</ul>
```

◉ `document.querySelectorAll('li')`

○ `document.querySelector('li')`

○ `document.getElementById('li')`

○ `document.querySelectorAll('ul')`

**Explanation:** querySelectorAll('li') returns a NodeList of all the li elements that your code can iterate through with forEach().

---

**DOM 8**

Which of the following statements is another way to get a list of the `li` elements?

```css
<ul id="numbers">
    <li id="one">One</li>
    <li id="two">Two</li>
    <li id="three">Three</li>
</ul>
```

○ `document.querySelector('ul li')`

○ `document.querySelectorAll('ul')`

◉ `document.getElementById('numbers').children`

○ `document.querySelector('li').parentNode`

**Explanation:** The `children` property of the `ul` element retrieved by `getElementById('numbers')` is a `HTMLCollection` of all the `li` elements that your code can turn into an array and iterate through with `forEach()`.

---

**DOM 9**

If you wanted to add the element referenced by `newLi` to the end of the following list, which statement does that?

```css
<ul id="numbers">
    <li id="one">One</li>
    <li id="two">Two</li>
    <li id="three">Three</li>
</ul>
```

◉ `document.getElementById('numbers').insertAdjacentElement('beforeend', newLi);`

○ `document.getElementById('numbers').insertAdjacentElement('afterend', newLi);`

○ `document.getElementById('numbers').createElement(newLi);`

○ `document.getElementById('three').nextElementSibling = newLi;`

**Explanation:** `getElementById('numbers')` gets a reference to the `ul` element and `insertAdjacentElement('beforeend', newLi)` adds the `newLi` element as its last child.
