# Reading files

Every language has classes for opening and reading files in its standard library. Working with files follows a very common pattern.

In Java, the class that you use to read files is the `Scanner` class. Given the location of a file, the `Scanner` class can open the file and read from it, either character by character, line by line, or all at once.

To understand how your code reads files, you'll need to understand the concept of data streams.

## Data streams

In computer science, a **stream** is a data structure that reads data as a series of ordered bytes. You mainly work with text data streams, so each byte represents a character in a large string.

You can think of a stream like an assembly line. You don't have to process everything at once. Instead, you work piece by piece as the items move down the line. Your data works the same way. You can have it delivered character by character or line by line instead of dealing with the entire file at once.

The characters can come from anywhere—from a user typing on a keyboard, a network connection to a file on the internet, or a file on the hard drive of your computer. You've already worked with data streams when you read input from a user. Now you can work with files in the same fashion.

By using a stream and only reading in a small part of a file at a time, you can work with many different sizes of files. Some files can be multiple gigabytes in size or even larger.

## Opening a file stream

Opening a file for reading requires that you know the path to the file that you want to read.

Many programs ask the user what file they want to read in. This gets the **file path**, or the location on the hard drive to find the file. Once you obtain the file path, you can open that file and read from it.

After you have the file path, you can use that to create a new `File` object:

```java
File dataFile = new File(filePath);
```

You can use the `java.io.File` class to create objects that represent a file on the file system. Using this class, you can check if the file already exists by using the `exists()` method, or see if you have permission to access the file with `canWrite()` or `canRead()`.

Keep in mind that this doesn't open the file. It only gives you a reference to it in Java. To open the file, pass the `File` object to a new `Scanner`:

```java
Scanner dataInput = new Scanner(dataFile);
```

The `Scanner` then opens the file and prepares the data stream of the file's contents, ready for you to read.

## Reading text from a file

You can read text from a `Scanner` using a file like you did when using user input. Usually, you want to read the file line by line to process it. You can do that by calling the `nextLine()` method in a while loop:

```java
while (dataInput.hasNextLine()) {
    String lineOfInput = dataInput.nextLine();
    ...
}
```

This assigns the first line of the file, not including the return character at the end, to the `lineOfInput` variable. This allows you to work with that line as you would any other string. Then, it gives you the next line and continues. Once it reaches the end of the file, `hasNextLine()` returns `false`, and the while loop ends.