# Command line

The term **command line** refers to any text-based computer interface. Nearly all operating systems have a **command-line interface** or CLI, whether it's apparent to users or not.

The command line can be a powerful tool. Developers and other computer professionals tend to prefer the command line because of its flexibility. While each command typically performs a single function, you can combine commands to perform complex tasks. There are also many applications that developers use that are only available as a command-line application.

Other synonymous terms for the command line include command prompt, terminal, console, or shell.

## Accessing the CLI
Each operating system comes with its own command-line interface. Many use the same basic commands, but they're not necessarily compatible with each other.

This course assumes you're running **Bash**. Bash is a popular command line that's available on Windows, macOS, and Linux.

### Windows
Bash doesn't come preinstalled on Windows. However, there are many tools such as "Git Bash" and "Windows Terminal" that give you a Bash shell. This is different than the "Command Prompt" and "PowerShell" applications that come preinstalled on Windows.

### macOS
Bash comes preinstalled on macOS, but it isn't the default shell on recent versions. When you open the "Terminal" application, you can type `bash` to get a Bash prompt. If you don't want to type that every time, you can type `chsh -s /bin/bash` to set Bash as your default shell.

### Linux
Bash may be preinstalled on Linux depending on your installed version. You can follow the same directions for macOS to run Bash and change your default shell.

## Anatomy of a command
Before you learn about important Bash commands, you need to understand what makes up a command.

The most basic command is a single word—that's a string of characters without a space and not necessarily an English word. This word typically runs a program or performs some built-in task.

### Parameters
Some commands can use additional information to perform a task called a **parameter**, or sometimes called an **argument**.

Parameters may be optional or required depending on the command and the parameter. A space separates commands and parameters, and separates multiple parameters. Parameters always come after commands, and the order can matter depending on the command.

Examples of commands with parameters look like this:

```
command parameter
command parameter1 parameter2
```

### Options
Some commands can have their behavior altered through **options**, sometimes called **flags** or **switches**. You can use options to do something different than the normal behavior, like displaying information in a specific format.

Options are separated from parameters and commands by a space and also have to come after the command. Options are prefixed by a `-` or `--`. Single dash (`-`) options are typically one character, while double dash (`--`) options can sometimes be written out. Single dash options can sometimes be combined with the same dash.

Examples of commands with options and parameters:

```
command -o
command -o parameter
command --output parameter
command -o -v
command -ov
command --output --verbose
```

In the next lesson, you'll learn about specific Bash commands that you can use to navigate a file system.