# Writing to files

Reading from files is a lot like reading user input. Writing to files is a lot like writing to user output, but instead of using `System.out`, you connect to a file using a `PrintWriter` class.

## Opening a file for writing

As mentioned in the error handling section of reading files, opening files in a `try-with-resources` block ensures that the file is properly closed once you're done writing to it. But instead of a `Scanner`, you'll open the file with a `PrintWriter`:

```java
try (PrintWriter dataOutput = new PrintWriter(dataFile)) {
    ...
} catch (FileNotFoundException e) {
    System.err.println("Cannot open the file for writing.");
}
```

Once the file is open in a `PrintWriter` object, you can write to it by passing strings to its `println()` or `print()` methods:

```java
try (PrintWriter dataOutput = new PrintWriter(dataFile)) {
    dataOutput.println("Writing the first line of the file");
    dataOutput.println("Writing the second line of the file");
} catch (FileNotFoundException e) {
    System.err.println("Cannot open the file for writing.");
}
```

After writing these lines successfully to a file, the file contents are:

```
Writing the first line of the file
Writing the second line of the file
```

## Opening a file for appending

When you create a `PrintWriter` by passing in a `File` object, Java creates the file and writes the contents. If the file already exists, Java **_overwrites_** the contents that were in the file with your new content.

There are times you need to add more lines to an existing file. For example, if your program is writing an audit trail, you wouldn't want to remove the previous contents each time you write a new audit message. In a case like this, you must **_append_** to the existing file. Appending means that the content you write to the file is added to the end of the file instead of overwriting everything in it.

To do that, you need to open the file with a `FileOutputStream` first, with a line like this:

```java
try (PrintWriter dataOutput = new PrintWriter(
    // Passing true to the FileOutputStream constructor says to append
    new FileOutputStream(dataFile, true)
)) {
```

Creating the `FileOutputStream` and passing `true` as the second parameter informs Java to open the file for appending. This allows you to add more information to an existing file instead of starting over with an empty file.

---

# Reading from one file while writing to another

Sometimes you need to read from one file and write to another file. This can happen when doing any kind of manipulation of text files, like search and replace.

You can use a `try-with-resoures` block to open the files you need. To do this, separate the files with a semicolon:

```java
try (
    Scanner dataInput = new Scanner(inputFile);
    PrintWriter dataOutput = new PrintWriter(outputFile)
) {
    while(dataInput.hasNextLine()) {
        String lineOfInput = dataInput.nextLine();
        dataOutput.println(lineOfInput.replace("mobile", "cellphone"));
    }
} catch (FileNotFoundException e) {
    System.err.println("Cannot open the file for writing.");
}
```

>🛈 Warning: Never read and write to the same file
>
>It might not be obvious, but reading and writing to the same file is a bad idea. While the language might allow you to do it, doing this can cause all sorts of problems and you shouldn't do it.
>
>If you want to change a file directly, say, finding a word and replacing it in the same file, you must instead read from the original file, write to a new empty file and, when you're done and everything is successful, move the new file to the original location to overwrite the original file.

---

# Unit summary

In this unit, you learned:

-   How to write text into a new file.
-   How to write text into an existing file, appending to its content.
-   How to read from one file and write to another in a single `try-with-resources` block.