# Using JWTs

To authenticate with an API, there's typically an endpoint that you can send your username and password to through a `POST` request. You make this request using the `exchange()` method in the `RestTemplate` class:

```java
// username and password in JSON format escaping the double quote
String json = "{\"username\":\"user\",\"password\":\"password\"}";

HttpHeaders headers = new HttpHeaders();
headers.setContentType(MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON);
HttpEntity<Void> entity = new HttpEntity<>(json, headers);
ResponseEntity<Map> response = restTemplate.exchange(
    "http://localhost:8080/login", HttpMethod.POST, entity, Map.class);
```

The `HttpHeaders` class is a data structure representing HTTP request or response headers, mapping `String` header names to a list of `String` values. In this example, you set the `Content-Type` header to a value of `application/json`. To send the JSON payload and headers in the request, you need to attach them to an `HttpEntity`. The `RestTemplate`'s `exchange()` method provides more control over the convenience methods you've seen so far.

>**🛈 Note: What's a convenience method?**
>
>A convenience method is a method that makes something complex or verbose more convenient and accessible to use.

Look at the `exchange()` method below:

```
exchange(URI url, HttpMethod method, HttpEntity<?> requestEntity, Class<T> responseType)
```

The `exchange()` method returns a `ResponseEntity<T>`. In this case, you know you're getting back key-value pairs in the form of a JSON string, so the type is `ResponseEntity<Map>`. This allows you to retrieve the value of the token using the key:

```json
String token = response.getBody().get("token")
```

>**🛈 Note: Example names**
>
>Remember these fields are for illustrative purposes. The information you receive from another developer's API may have different names or contain other data.

To use the token in requests, you pass the token in the bearer authentication header before you make the request:

```java
HttpHeaders headers = new HttpHeaders();
headers.setBearerAuth(token);
HttpEntity<Void> entity = new HttpEntity<>(headers);
ResponseEntity<Location[]> response = restTemplate.exchange(
    "http://localhost:8080/locations", HttpMethod.GET, entity, Location[].class);
```

## HTTP response codes

There are two response codes that you need to be aware of when consuming an API that requires authentication. If you remember from a previous lesson, `4xx` codes are client-side errors:

| **Status Code** | **Description** | **Cause**                                                      |
| --------------- | --------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `401`           | `Unauthorized`  | Occurs when you don't supply authentication credentials.       |
| `403`           | `Forbidden`     | Occurs when your credentials aren't authorized for a resource. |

You'll want to check for these status codes when you handle unsuccessful responses so you provide the appropriate feedback to the user, such as prompting them to log in or informing them that they aren't authorized for the resource.