# Quiz

**Securing APIs 1**

What's the name of the process of giving a user, or group of users, permission to access a specific resource or function?

◉ Authorization

○ Authentication

○ Decoding

○ Bearer

**Explanation:** Authorization is related to permissions of users.

---

**Securing APIs 2**

What are some common forms of authentication that a software application can use?

	Select all correct options

□ CAPTCHA

■ One-time code received through SMS or mobile application

■ Fingerprint

□ DNA sample

■ Password

---

**Securing APIs 3**

You've authenticated with a server and received a JSON Web Token (JWT). What must you do in subsequent requests to the same server?

○ Include the JWT in the body of the request labeled `token`.

○ Add the JWT as a query string to all request URLs with the key name `jwt`.

◉ Send the JWT in the Authorization HTTP header.

○ Nothing. You've authenticated once—the server knows who you are.

---

**Securing APIs 4**

The "payload" section of a JWT contains data known as what?

○ Authorizations

◉ Claims

○ Ownership factors

○ Secrets

**Explanation:** Claims are statements about an entity, typically a user.

---

**Securing APIs 5**

You have a JWT stored in a string named AUTH_TOKEN. How do you pass a JWT with RestTemplate requests? Put the following statements in order:

▤
```java
HttpHeaders headers = new HttpHeaders();
headers.setBearerAuth(AUTH_TOKEN);
```

▤
```java
HttpEntity<Void> entity = new HttpEntity<>(headers);
```

▤
```java
ResponseEntity<Location[]> response =
   restTemplate.exchange(URL, HttpMethod.GET, entity, Location[].class);
```

▤
```java
Location[] locations = response.getBody();
```

**Explanation:** This is the correct way to create a bearer auth header, attach it to the entity, and pass it to the exchange method.

---

**Securing APIs 6**

If your client application received a 403 Forbidden, what does that mean about your request?

○ The request needs to pass authentication credentials with the request.

○ There's no resource located at the URL.

◉ The request was to a resource that the authenticated user doesn't have permission for.

○ Requests aren't allowed from your IP address.

**Explanation:** 403 is the response received when you provide authorization details, but the user doesn't have permission.

---

**Securing APIs 7**

What can you tell from the following class and method declarations?

```java
@RestController
@RequestMapping("/users")
@PreAuthorize("isAuthenticated()")
public class UserController {

      @RequestMapping(path = "/{id}", method = RequestMethod.GET)
      public User get() {
         ...
      }

      @RequestMapping(path = "", method = RequestMethod.POST)
      public User create() {
         ...
      }

      @RequestMapping(path = "/{id}", method = RequestMethod.PUT)
      public User update() {
         ...
      }

      @PreAuthorize("hasRole('ADMIN')")
      @RequestMapping(path = "/{id}", method = RequestMethod.DELETE)
      public User delete() {
         ...
      }

}
```

	Select all correct options

□ Only the `delete()` method requires the user to be authenticated.

■ All methods in the controller require the user to be authenticated.

□ The `get()`, `post()`, and `put()` methods don't require the user to be authenticated.

□ Only JWT authentication is accepted.

■ The `delete()` method can only be accessed by users with the role of `ADMIN`.

**Explanation:** 
-   All methods require an authenticated user because of the `@PreAuthorize("isAuthenticated()")` annotation on the class.
-   Because this method has the `@PreAuthorize("hasRole('ADMIN')")` annotation, only admins can access the `delete()` method.

---

**Securing APIs 8**

How do you declare a method that doesn't need authorization in a controller that has the `@PreAuthorize("isAuthenticated()")` annotation?

◉ `@PreAuthorize("permitAll")`

○ `@PreAuthorize("hasRole('ANONYMOUS')")`

○ `@PreAuthorize("hasRole('NONE')")`

○ `@NoAuth`