# Bash commands

Now you'll learn about some important Bash commands you can use to navigate the file system and work with the files and folders on your hard drive.

## Navigating the file system
Navigating around the system requires knowledge of three commands: `cd`, `pwd`, and `ls`.

### Change directories
When you're working in the command line, you're always in a directory somewhere. This is your _working directory_. You can change the working directory with the `cd` command:

```
cd /Users/alice/Documents
```

This command directs the computer to go to the root folder, `/`, then into the `Users` folder, then the `alice` folder inside of that and finally, the `Documents` folder in that. This style of using `cd` is using an _absolute path_. An absolute path always starts at the beginning of the file system—at the root—and then specifies each path to take from there.

If you run the previous command, you enter the `/Users/alice/Documents` folder. What if you want to go to the `/Users/alice` folder from there?

You could type out the full path again, like this:

```
cd /Users/alice
```

You could also use a _relative_ path. If you're already in `/Users/alice/Documents`, you can go up one directory by typing this:

```
cd ..
```

The `..` isn't a directory—it has a special meaning. When used as a path, it means "go up one level from here" or to the parent directory. In this case, if you run `cd ..` from inside `/Users/alice/Documents`, you change directories to `/Users/alice`.

If you're in `/Users/alice/Documents` and you type this:

```
cd ../..
```

This sends you to `/Users`. In other words, it sends you to your parent's parent.

There's another special character you can use in a path. The `~` character always means your home folder. Regardless of what folder you're in, you can type this to always change to your home folder:

```
cd ~
```

You can also use the `~` as part of a path. If your home directory is `/Users/alice`, then you can type this to go to `/Users/alice/Documents`:

```
cd ~/Documents
```

Now, you know how to get somewhere, but how do you know where you are?

### Print working directory
You can find out what folder you're in at any time by using the `pwd` command:

```
pwd

/Users/alice
```

The `pwd` command tells you where you are as an absolute path. But how do you find out what's here?

### List directory contents
To find out what's in the current folder, use the command `ls`:

```
ls

content/  node_modules/  package.json  package-lock.json  README.md  robots.txt  styles/
```

`ls` lists out all of the folders and files that are in the current folder. This helps you navigate easier and make sure that you have what you're looking for. Bash shows folders with a trailing `/` to distinguish them from files in the list.

The `ls` command accepts an optional argument giving the path to list. In the preceding example, to list the contents of the `styles` subdirectory, you can use the relative path of the folder to list:

```
ls styles
```

If you want more details on those files and folders, you can pass some command line [options](https://lms.techelevator.com/cohorts/42/blocks/5/content_files/command-line/03-command-line.md#options) to `ls`, like this:

```
ls -al

total 744
drwxr-xr-x 1 alice 197121      0 Jun 14 09:00 ./
drwxr-xr-x 1 alice 197121      0 Jun 10 11:18 ../
drwxr-xr-x 1 alice 197121      0 Jun 14 12:12 .git/
-rw-r--r-- 1 alice 197121   1027 May  8 18:08 .gitignore
-rw-r--r-- 1 alice 197121    390 Jun 14 09:00 .vale.ini
drwxr-xr-x 1 alice 197121      0 Jun 14 09:00 content/
drwxr-xr-x 1 alice 197121      0 Jun 14 10:25 node_modules/
-rw-r--r-- 1 alice 197121    519 Jun 14 09:00 package.json
-rw-r--r-- 1 alice 197121 441974 Jun 14 09:00 package-lock.json
-rw-r--r-- 1 alice 197121    499 May 10 13:49 README.md
-rw-r--r-- 1 alice 197121     28 May  8 18:08 robots.txt
drwxr-xr-x 1 alice 197121      0 Jun 14 09:00 styles/
```

Using the two flags `-al`, which stands for `all` and `long`, provides more details on the children of this folder. It also shows hidden files, or files that start with a period (`.`).

## Working with files and folders
When you want to work with the files and folders on your computers, there are some useful commands that you'll need to know.

### Moving files and folders
To move a file or a folder to a different place, use the `mv` command. It requires two [parameters](https://lms.techelevator.com/cohorts/42/blocks/5/content_files/command-line/03-command-line.md#parameters). The first parameter is the file or folder you want to move, and the second parameter is where to move it to.

For example, if you wanted to move a file called `readme.txt` from your home folder to your `Documents` folder, you could do it like this:

```
mv /Users/alice/readme.txt /Users/alice/Documents/
```

Alternatively, you could use the `~` to mean your home directory:

```
mv ~/readme.txt ~/Documents/
```

This command is also how you rename things. If you wanted to rename `readme.txt` to `info.txt`, you could do that like this:

```
mv readme.txt info.txt
```

### Copying files and folders
You can also copy files and folders, putting a duplicate in another location without getting rid of the original.

To copy a file, use the `cp` command:

```
cp readme.txt info.txt
```

After this runs, you still have your original `readme.txt`, but you have a new file called `info.txt` with the same content.

To copy a folder, you need to add a `-r` option to the command:

```
cp -r Documents Documents_backup
```

The `r` stands for recursive, meaning it duplicates the `Documents` folder _and all of its contents_, so be careful running it on a folder with a lot of content.

### Making folders
You can also make an empty folder at any time with the `mkdir` command:

```
mkdir my_stuff
```

This creates a new directory called `my_stuff` at your current location.

### Removing files and folders
## Warning: Take caution when removing files and folders

Unlike deleting a file in Windows and macOS, where it sends the file to the "Recycle Bin" or "Trash", these commands remove the file or folder permanently with no ability to undo your action.

You can remove files with the `rm` command:

```
rm info.txt
```

You can remove **empty** directories with the `rmdir` command:

```
rmdir my_stuff
```

However, you can't delete a folder that still has files in it.

## Additional shell commands
See [Bash File System Commands](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Guide_to_Unix/Commands/File_System_Utilities) to learn more about additional shell commands.