# Quiz

**Exception Handling 1**

An exception is ______

○ An error that occurs as you write and compile code.

○ Code that runs when a particular condition is false.

◉ An error that occurs as your program is running.

○ When the user receives an error message.

**Explanation:** Also called a runtime error, an exception occurs when your program is running.

---

**Exception Handling 2**

Select all of the following that describe benefits of exception handling:

	Select all correct options

■ Display a specific and clear error message to the user.

□ Check if a file exists before opening it.

■ Signal to other code that your code didn't complete.

□ Prevent going out of bounds with an array.

■ Allow your program to continue running.

---

**Exception Handling 3**

Which options would be displayed by the following code?

```java
try {
    System.out.println("One");
    throw new Exception();
    System.out.println("Two");
} catch (Exception e) {
    System.out.println("Three");
}

System.out.println("Four");
```

	Select all correct options

■ One

□ Two

■ Three

■ Four

**Explanation:** The "Two" isn't printed because an exception is thrown before the line runs. The "Three" **_is_** printed because the `catch` block runs when the exception is thrown.

---

**Exception Handling 4**

Because `FileNotFoundException` extends `IOException` which also extends `Exception`, they have all of the same methods and properties of `Exception`. This is an example of what OOP principle?

○ Polymorphism

◉ Inheritance

○ Cohesion

○ Encapsulation

**Explanation:** A subclass "inherits" all the properties and methods of its superclass.

---

**Exception Handling 5**

Which options would be displayed by the following code?

```java
try {
    System.out.println("One");
    throw new IllegalArgumentException();
    System.out.println("Two");
} catch (IllegalArgumentException e) {
    System.out.println("Three");
} catch (Exception e) {
    System.out.println("Four");
}

System.out.println("Five");
```

	Select all correct options

■ One

□ Two

■ Three

□ Four

■ Five

**Explanation:** The "Two" isn't printed because an exception is thrown before the line runs. The "Four" isn't printed because the exception that's thrown is an `IllegalArgumentException` which has its own `catch` that prints the "Three" line.

---

**Exception Handling 6**

Which options would be displayed by the following code?

```java
try {
    System.out.println("One");
    System.out.println("Two");
} catch (Exception e) {
    System.out.println("Three");
} finally {
    System.out.println("Four");
}

System.out.println("Five");
```

	Select all correct options

■ One

■ Two

□ Three

■ Four

■ Five

**Explanation:** The "Three" isn't printed because an exception isn't thrown. The "Four" is printed because it's in a `finally` block that always runs whether an exception is thrown or not.

---

**Exception Handling 7**

What's displayed by this code?

```java
try {
    String inputNumber = "five";
    int result = Integer.parseInt(inputNumber);
    System.out.println("The number is " + result);
} catch (NumberFormatException e) {
    System.out.println("Invalid number format");
} catch (Exception e) {
    System.out.println("Exception occurred");
}
```

○ The number is 5

○ The number is five

◉ Invalid number format

○ Exception occurred

**Explanation:** The `Integer.parseInt()` method can't parse a number written out as a word, which causes a `NumberFormatException` to occur. There's no other output.

---

**Exception Handling 8**

It's safe to display a stack trace to a user.

○ True

◉ False

**Explanation:** A stack trace can reveal sensitive information about your code that a malicious user can use against your application. Also a stack trace isn't helpful or meaningful to non-programming end users, so it's best to not show it to any end users.

---

**Exception Handling 9**

If this exception was thrown:

```java
throw new IllegalArgumentException("Parameter isn't a valid value");
```

How would you access the string passed to it in this `catch` block?

```java
catch (IllegalArgumentException e) {

}
```

○  `e.getCause()`

○  `e.toString()`

◉  `e.getMessage()`

○  `e.getStackTrace()`

**Explanation:** The `Message` property often contains the reason for the exception, which can be provided by Java or overridden by passing a string to the exception's constructor.
