# Integrated development environment (IDE)

If you were a programmer in the early days of computing, you wrote applications on punch cards. One line of code, one punch card. You stacked the cards horizontally in cardboard trays, taking great care to keep the cards unbent and in order.

When the application was ready, you carried the tray to the jobs desk and scheduled the application to run. The turnaround time between submitting a job and getting results could be anywhere from minutes to days, depending upon the availability of the computer and the priority of the application. It was a slow and tedious process.

Thankfully, programming has changed since then. Over time, programmers have been able to leverage improvements in hardware and software to make their work easier and more manageable. Vendors developed text editors so programmers could write the code on screens and not on punch cards. Early languages like Basic and Pascal even had specific programming environments with built-in capabilities tailored for each language.

Additionally, as programming transformed from programmers working alone and into broader team efforts, a new breed of tools to share and communicate emerged. Eventually, all these things came together into a single tool called an **integrated development environment** (IDE).

In general, IDEs share several common features.

## Projects

All of the resources of an application, including its source code, tests, libraries, and other types of files like sounds and images exist in a folder structure on the local hard drive known as the project folder, or **project** for short.

There's other information related to a project that's tracked by the IDE, such as the language version, build settings, and links to external resources. The IDE maintains this information in the **project settings**.

The IDE displays resources in a tree structure with the project as the root of the tree. You navigate between the various resources the same way you do in the Windows File Explorer. When you click on a specific resource, the IDE displays the contents of the resource in an editor or viewer depending upon its type.

The IDE gives the programmer the ability to copy, move, add, change, and remove resources. A version control system, if present, tracks all these changes, and allows the programmer to undo them if needed.

## Language-specific enhancements

Perhaps one of the most appreciated features of an IDE is the assistance when working with source code.

### Syntax highlighting

**Syntax highlighting** displays text in different colors and fonts to help programmers quickly identify and understand the various parts of code. In addition to making code more readable, syntax highlighting is often used to point out the location of errors. Some examples include a misspelled keyword or a mismatched pair like an opening parenthesis without a closing parenthesis.

### Intelligent code completion

Intelligent code completion, often called **IntelliSense**, is a language-aware code completion feature. It provides suggested bits of code that the programmer can either ignore or accept as they type. IntelliSense can help to increase programmer productivity while significantly reducing typos and other common mistakes.

>**🛈 Note: IntelliSense**
>
>Technically, "IntelliSense" is Microsoft's version of intelligent code completion included in Visual Studio and other Microsoft products.

In addition to these features, many IDEs offer a number of extras such as debugging tools to track down and fix problems, refactoring tools to improve code quality, connection management to services such databases, and profiling tools to identify performance bottlenecks.