# Introduction

So far you've learned about the HTTP protocol and how requests are made. Now you'll learn how to make HTTP requests in your code and how to handle the data you get back.

To interact with web services, you need a way to send HTTP requests and process the results. This is usually accomplished using a class or library that provides a "client" to make the requests and methods to read the response from the server.

In this unit, you'll continue to use Spring framework libraries to assist you. In this case, you'll use the Spring REST Client [RestTemplate](https://docs.spring.io/spring/docs/current/spring-framework-reference/integration.html#rest-resttemplate) . It's available through Java's dependency management platform called Maven. The code that you'll work with has `RestTemplate` installed already.

---

# Terminology

To review, API stands for **application programming interface** (API). An API is a mechanism, or protocol, that allows the transfer of data between different computer programs.

A **Web API** is an API that's accessible on the internet. As you learn more about Web APIs, you may see the term "consuming an API" on the internet or hear about it when talking with other developers. "Consuming an API" means that you're interacting with a Web API in your code.

A Web API **endpoint** is the URL that you use to access the API. In the case of the ExchangeRate-API from the previous unit, the endpoint is `https://api.exchangerate-api.com/v4/latest/USD`.

An API often returns data in **JavaScript Object Notation** (JSON) format, which is a lightweight and human readable data format that uses key-value pairs to define and structure data. The JSON format may represent an array of results or a single result.

The examples that follow use the ExchangeRate-API for code demonstration. Before continuing on, look at the data returned from the API, either in your browser or in Postman. Note that the result is returned as a single object.

---

# Using an API in code

Using `RestTemplate`, you can make a basic HTTP `GET` request to the ExchangeRate-API using the following code:

```java
RestTemplate restTemplate = new RestTemplate(); // Create a new client
ResponseEntity response = restTemplate.getForEntity(
                "https://api.exchangerate-api.com/v4/latest/USD",
                String.class); // Make GET request using client
System.out.println(response.getBody()); // Your return data returned from .getBody()
```

>**🛈 Note: What does response.getBody() return?**
>
>`response.getBody()` returns a string representation of the JSON, just like if you saw the API response in your browser. In the next section, you'll see how `RestTemplate` can automatically convert the response data into a Java object.

---

# Processing API responses

Now you have the response, but how do you use the JSON data in your application?

## Response status

`RestTemplate` only parses the response if the HTTP request is sent successfully and receives a response with an HTTP status code indicating success. If the request isn't successful, `RestTemplate` throws an exception to indicate what went wrong. You'll learn how to handle errors in the next unit.

As mentioned in the previous unit, HTTP responses include a status code. Anything in the 200-299 range is a success response. However, when performing a `GET` request, the only response code you need for success is `200`.

>**🛈 Note: Why only 200?**
>
>Different response codes mean different things, even if they're all in the "success" category. Some response codes are only suitable for request methods other than `GET`. You'll see an example of that in the next unit.

## Parsing JSON

You can use `RestTemplate` to make the request using HTTP `GET`, retrieve the response, and deserialize the response body—meaning the JSON—into a Java object or array of objects.

`RestTemplate` uses a **deserializer**, which converts a string into an object or array of objects. `RestTemplate` attempts to map every field in the JSON response to a Java class you provide. If the result is an array of objects, it attempts to create a structure you define. You could use an array or one of the Java Collections structures to store the data.

First, you need to define the class for JSON you're expecting. Take a look at the return JSON from the ExchangeRate-API:

```json
{
  "base": "USD",
  "date": "2021-08-10",
  "time_last_updated": 1628553601,
  "rates": {
    "USD": 1,
    "AED": 3.67,
    "AFN": 79.94,
    "ALL": 103.28,
    "AMD": 491.29,
    "ANG": 1.79,
    "AOA": 643.02,
    "ARS": 96.89,
    "AUD": 1.36,
    "AWG": 1.79,
    //the rest omitted for brevity
  }
}
```

You define your class with the same names. Note the slight variation—`timeLastUpdated` is OK:

```java
public class ExchangeRates {
    private String base;
    private String date;
    private String timeLastUpdated;
    private Map<String, Double> rates;
    // constructors, getters, setters...
}
```

First, you'll make the `GET` request in a similar way that you've already seen. There are two differences between the following code and the code you saw earlier. Namely, you use the `.getForObject()` method to return the JSON as an object that you specify, and the `ExchangeRates.class` replaces the `String.class`:

```java
ExchangeRates response = restTemplate.getForObject(
                "https://api.exchangerate-api.com/v4/latest/USD",
                ExchangeRates.class);
```

That single line of code returns an instantiated `ExchangeRate` object populated with the JSON data. To get access to the data, call the getter methods on the class:

```java
System.out.println(response.getBase()); // prints USD
System.out.println(response.getDate()); // prints 2021-08-10
// etc...
```

If you don't want all the fields returned by the API, you can omit them from your class. For example, if you didn't want the `base` and `date` fields, you could declare your class like this:

```java
public class ExchangeRates {
    private String timeLastUpdated;
    private Map<String, Double> rates;
    // constructors, getters, setters...
}
```

The resulting object is constructed without those properties.

>**🛈 Note: Overriding the default naming strategy**
>
>The `RestTemplate` serialization process has a default _naming strategy_ which automatically converts between standard Java _camelCase_ field names and JSON _snake_case_ property names. That's why the difference previously noted between the JSON property `time_last_updated` and the Java field `timeLastUpdated` names works without errors. The default naming strategy transparently handles the difference in names for you.
>
>There are times, however, when you may need to override the default naming strategy using the `@JsonProperty()` annotation. For instance, assume an `Employee` class has the four fields—`firstName`, `lastName`, `streetAddress` and `secondAddress`—but the receiver of the JSON expects the address properties to be named: `address` and `address2`:
>
>```json
>{
>  "first_name": "Lawrence",
>  "last_name": "Ellison",
>  "address": "1234 Test Drive",
>  "address2": ""
>}
>```
>
>To override the default naming strategy for the address fields, you annotate `Employee.java` twice, once for `address`, and the other for `address2`. _Don't forget to include the required import, as the following code shows_:
>
>```java
>// Import the JsonProperty annotation in order to use it.
>import com.fasterxml.jackson.annotation.JsonProperty;
>
>public class Employee {
>  private String firstName;
>  private String lastName;
>  @JsonProperty("address")      // streetAddress => address
>  private String streetAddress;
>  @JsonProperty("address2")     // secondAddress => address2
>  private String secondAddress;
>
>  // Assume getters and setters
>
>}
>```
>
>There is no need to annotate the `firstName` or `lastName` fields since the default naming strategy handles them automatically.

---

# Unit summary

In this unit, you've learned how to:

-   Make an HTTP `GET` request to a web API and process the response using `RestTemplate`
-   Parse the returned JSON into a Java object using the `getForObject()` method

---

# Quiz

## **Consuming RESTful APIs (Part 1) 1**

**What does it mean to "consume an API?"**

○ Use an API too much

○ Register for an account to use an API

◉ Interact with an API in code

○ Include the Spring REST client in your Java project

**Explanation:** Interacting with an API, typically using a REST client like Spring's `RestTemplate`, is called "consuming an API."


## **Consuming RESTful APIs (Part 1) 2**

**What does a deserializer do?**

	Select all correct options

□ Sends an HTTP request

■ Creates an object

□ Replaces the JSON string with a modified JSON string

■ Sets the values of properties with matching names

**Explanation:** A deserializer converts a JSON string into an object. It creates the new object and sets the values of its properties with names that correspond to properties in the JSON.


## **Consuming RESTful APIs (Part 1) 3**

**How would you determine that `RestTemplate` received a response status code in the 400-599 range that indicates an error?**

◉ `RestTemplate` throws an exception

○ `getForObject()` returns null

○ The response status code stored in `RestTemplate` is in that range

○ Deserializing the JSON fails

**Explanation:** If a request isn't successful, `RestTemplate` throws an exception.


## **Consuming RESTful APIs (Part 1) 4**

**How can you have the `getObject()` method of `RestTemplate` return an object of type `Person`?**

○ By assigning the result to a variable of type `Person`

◉ By specifying `Person.class` as a parameter

○ By specifying `Person` as a parameter

○ By casting the result as a `Person`

**Explanation:** The `getObject()` method needs a `Class` object to determine what type of object to create and return. The quickest way to get the `Class` object for any class is to add `.class` to the name of a class (like `Person.class`). That's called a "class literal."


## **Consuming RESTful APIs (Part 1) 5**

**True or False: In order to deserialize JSON into an object, all the properties present in the JSON must also be present in the object.**

○ True

◉ False

**Explanation:** Only properties with matching names have their values set. Other properties are ignored.


## **Consuming RESTful APIs (Part 1) 6**

**What's the output of this program if the JSON string returned by the API endpoint `http://localhost:3000/snacks/1` is `{"snack_name": "Potato Crisps", "slot": "A1"}`?**

```java
//---Snack.java---
public class Snack {
    @JsonProperty("slot")
    private String position = "";

    private String name = "";

    // Assume standard getters and setters.
}

//---Example.java---
public static void main(String[] args) {
    RestTemplate restTemplate = new RestTemplate();
    Snack snack =
        restTemplate.getForObject("http://localhost:3000/snacks/1", Snack.class);
    System.out.println("Snack: " + snack.getName());
    System.out.println("Position: " + snack.getPosition());
}
```

○
```shell
Snack: Potato Crisps  
Position: A1
```

○
```shell
Snack: Potato Crisps  
Position:
```

◉
```shell
Snack:  
Position: A1
```

○
```shell
Snack:  
Position:
```

**Explanation:** Since `snack_name` doesn't match `name` that property isn't set.


## **Consuming RESTful APIs (Part 1) 7**

**If this JSON was returned by the API endpoint `http://localhost:3000/snacks`, which one of these lines of code would be correct?**

```json
[
    {"snack_name": "Potato Crisps", "slot": "A1"},
    {"snack_name": "Stackers", "slot": "A2"},
    {"snack_name": "Grain Waves", "slot": "A3"}
]
```

○ `Snack snacks = restTemplate.getForObject("http://localhost:3000/snacks", Snack.class);`

○ `Snack[] snacks = restTemplate.getForObject("http://localhost:3000/snacks", Snack.class);`

○ `Snack snacks = restTemplate.getForObject("http://localhost:3000/snacks", Snack[].class);`

◉ `Snack[] snacks = restTemplate.getForObject("http://localhost:3000/snacks", Snack[].class);`

**Explanation:** The JSON contains an array. `Snack[].class` is the class literal for an array of `Snack` objects, so that's what the call to `getObject()` returns.


## **Consuming RESTful APIs (Part 1) 8**

**What order do the following events happen in when your code calls an API with the `getObject()` method of `RestTemplate`?**

▤ An HTTP GET request is sent

▤ An HTTP response is received

▤ `RestTemplate` may throw an exception based on the response status code

▤ The deserializer creates a new object

▤ The deserializer sets values for properties with matching names

▤ `getObject()` returns an object to your code