# Processing API responses

Now you have the response, but how do you use the JSON data in your application?

## Response status

`RestTemplate` only parses the response if the HTTP request is sent successfully and receives a response with an HTTP status code indicating success. If the request isn't successful, `RestTemplate` throws an exception to indicate what went wrong. You'll learn how to handle errors in the next unit.

As mentioned in the previous unit, HTTP responses include a status code. Anything in the 200-299 range is a success response. However, when performing a `GET` request, the only response code you need for success is `200`.

## Note: Why only 200?

Different response codes mean different things, even if they're all in the "success" category. Some response codes are only suitable for request methods other than `GET`. You'll see an example of that in the next unit.

## Parsing JSON

You can use `RestTemplate` to make the request using HTTP `GET`, retrieve the response, and deserialize the response body—meaning the JSON—into a Java object or array of objects.

`RestTemplate` uses a **deserializer**, which converts a string into an object or array of objects. `RestTemplate` attempts to map every field in the JSON response to a Java class you provide. If the result is an array of objects, it attempts to create a structure you define. You could use an array or one of the Java Collections structures to store the data.

First, you need to define the class for JSON you're expecting. Take a look at the return JSON from the ExchangeRate-API:

```json
{
  "base": "USD",
  "date": "2021-08-10",
  "time_last_updated": 1628553601,
  "rates": {
    "USD": 1,
    "AED": 3.67,
    "AFN": 79.94,
    "ALL": 103.28,
    "AMD": 491.29,
    "ANG": 1.79,
    "AOA": 643.02,
    "ARS": 96.89,
    "AUD": 1.36,
    "AWG": 1.79,
    //the rest omitted for brevity
  }
}
```

You define your class with the same names. Note the slight variation—`timeLastUpdated` is OK:

```java
public class ExchangeRates {
    private String base;
    private String date;
    private String timeLastUpdated;
    private Map<String, Double> rates;
    // constructors, getters, setters...
}
```

First, you'll make the `GET` request in a similar way that you've already seen. There are two differences between the following code and the code you saw earlier. Namely, you use the `.getForObject()` method to return the JSON as an object that you specify, and the `ExchangeRates.class` replaces the `String.class`:

```java
ExchangeRates response = restTemplate.getForObject(
                "https://api.exchangerate-api.com/v4/latest/USD",
                ExchangeRates.class);
```

That single line of code returns an instantiated `ExchangeRate` object populated with the JSON data. To get access to the data, call the getter methods on the class:

```java
System.out.println(response.getBase()); // prints USD
System.out.println(response.getDate()); // prints 2021-08-10
// etc...
```

If you don't want all the fields returned by the API, you can omit them from your class. For example, if you didn't want the `base` and `date` fields, you could declare your class like this:

```java
public class ExchangeRates {
    private String timeLastUpdated;
    private Map<String, Double> rates;
    // constructors, getters, setters...
}
```

The resulting object is constructed without those properties.

## Note: Overriding the default naming strategy

The `RestTemplate` serialization process has a default _naming strategy_ which automatically converts between standard Java _camelCase_ field names and JSON _snake_case_ property names. That's why the difference previously noted between the JSON property `time_last_updated` and the Java field `timeLastUpdated` names works without errors. The default naming strategy transparently handles the difference in names for you.

There are times, however, when you may need to override the default naming strategy using the `@JsonProperty()` annotation. For instance, assume an `Employee` class has the four fields—`firstName`, `lastName`, `streetAddress` and `secondAddress`—but the receiver of the JSON expects the address properties to be named: `address` and `address2`:

```json
{
  "first_name": "Lawrence",
  "last_name": "Ellison",
  "address": "1234 Test Drive",
  "address2": ""
}
```

To override the default naming strategy for the address fields, you annotate `Employee.java` twice, once for `address`, and the other for `address2`. _Don't forget to include the required import, as the following code shows_:

```java
// Import the JsonProperty annotation in order to use it.
import com.fasterxml.jackson.annotation.JsonProperty;

public class Employee {
  private String firstName;
  private String lastName;
  @JsonProperty("address")      // streetAddress => address
  private String streetAddress;
  @JsonProperty("address2")     // secondAddress => address2
  private String secondAddress;

  // Assume getters and setters

}
```

There is no need to annotate the `firstName` or `lastName` fields since the default naming strategy handles them automatically.