# Restricting inheritance

## Final classes

A **final class** is a class that other classes can't inherit from. You'll get a compiler error if you specify that one of your classes extends a final class.

You declare a final class just like any other class, and add the keyword `final`:

```java
public final class Example {
    // Properties and methods can be declared normally,
    // but no other class can extend this one.
}
```

It's unlikely you'll need to create final classes very often, but it's important to know what a final class is because some very commonly used classes are final classes. For example, the `String` class is a final class. You can't create new child classes of `String`.

So why would the designers of the `String` class have restricted inheriting from it in that way? One reason is to guarantee that a `String` is always immutable. Making it a final class prevents problems that could result if a programmer was able to create their own mutable version of a `String` through inheritance and then pass it as a `String` to methods that assume immutability.

## Final methods

A **final method** is a method that a child class can't override. The child class inherits the method as-is and can't provide a different implementation of it.

When designing a class, you can make a method final to communicate that the method needs to remain unchanged, and that you expect child classes to customize their behavior in other ways.

Consider the `InsurancePolicy` example. You've created the `InsurancePolicy` class with an abstract `calculateAnnualPremium()` method that each child class must override, and are now adding a `calculateMonthlyPayment()` method. This method implements the company billing policy of dividing the annual premium into twelve even payments with any leftover amount from rounding added to the December bill. You could create it as a final method like this:

```java
public final BigDecimal calculateMonthlyPayment(Month month) {
    BigDecimal annualPremium = calculateAnnualPremium();
    BigDecimal regularPayment =
        annualPremium.divide(new BigDecimal(12), RoundingMode.DOWN);
    if (month == Month.DECEMBER) {
        BigDecimal elevenPayments = regularPayment.multiply(new BigDecimal(11));
        return annualPremium.subtract(elevenPayments);
    } else {
        return regularPayment;
    }
}
```

By making this method final, you make sure that all insurance policies calculate the monthly payment consistently, and communicate to developers creating child classes that the starting point when calculating the cost of a policy is the `calculateAnnualPremium()` method. This prevents a misunderstanding like trying to begin by writing the `calculateMonthlyPayment()` method followed by a `calculateAnnualPremium()` method that multiplies that value by twelve.