# Staging changes

Git has three main states that a file can exist in:

1.  **Modified** - the file has been changed but not marked to save to your local repository yet
2.  **Staged** - the file is marked in its current version to go into your local repository in the next commit
3.  **Committed** - the data is safely stored in your local repository

The `git status` command checks the status of all modified and staged files within the repository. As a developer, it becomes second nature to use the `git status` command to continually see which files have been staged or modified.

## Stage explicit files
You can use the `git add` command to stage a modified file:

```
> git add <file-name> [<file-name> ...]
```

This version of the `git add` command supports explicit file names to stage. You can stage multiple files at the same time by separating the names with spaces. The command `git add foo.txt bar.txt` stages two files: `foo.txt` and `bar.txt`.

## Stage explicit directory
This version allows you to specify a directory to have its contents staged:

```
> git add <directory-name> [<directory-name> ...]
```

Git detects which files inside the directory have been recently modified.

## Stage all changes beneath current location
This version allows you to stage the contents of _this directory and all directories beneath it_:

```
> git add .
```

It can save time over the other more tedious `git add` commands.

## Warning: Be careful with `git add .`
It's important to know what your current working directory is before running this command. If you aren't located in the root of the repository, you may only stage some of the changes. If you're located in the root and run this command, then you'll stage every addition, modification, and deletion to modified files in the repository.

## Stage all changes
```
> git add -A
```

This stages _all_ changes you have made anywhere within this repository, regardless of your current working directory. In many cases, you want to include all of the work that you have done since the last commit into the next commit.

## Note: Argument case
The case of the arguments matters to Git. In the previous example, `-A` must be uppercase for Git to recognize it.