# Units of Measurement

Every CSS declaration includes a property-value pair. Depending on the property, the value may require a unit of measurement. You saw these earlier in this unit with values like `20px`. `px` stands for "pixel" and represents one device pixel or dot on a screen. There are many units of measurement that are used for various CSS properties, but this section covers the most frequently used ones.

When including a length value, the unit identifier is required and is case insensitive. It must come immediately after the numeric part of the value, with no space in between. If the length is zero, the unit identifier isn't required:

```css
header {
  width: 600px;
}
.card {
  width: 10em;
  margin: 0; /* no unit needed when value is 0 */
}
```

There are two types of lengths in CSS: absolute and relative.

## Absolute units

Absolute units are fixed to a physical length, aren't relative to anything else, and are generally considered to always be the same size. The following example has a width set in pixels. As an absolute unit, this width remains the same no matter what else changes:

```css
container {
  width: 800px;
}
```

## Relative units

Relative units are relative to something else, perhaps the parent element, the root element, or size of the viewport. The benefit of using relative units over absolute is that your design can scale when your page does.

### `em` units

`em` is relative to the font size of the parent element. In the following example, there is an element with the class of `card` that defines a `font-size` of `10px`. Inside that element, there is a `<div>` with a class of `content`. Content defines a width of `20em` which is 20 times `.card`'s font size (10px) for a total width of `200px`:

```html
<div class="card">
  <div class="content">
    Hello, Card...
  </div>
</div>
```

```css
.card {
  font-size: 10px;
}
.card .content {
  width: 20em;
}
```

### `rem` units

`rem` stands for "root em." `rem` is relative to the font size of the root element—usually the `<html>` element. This typically defaults to `16px` by the browser but may be overridden in your style sheet.

You can use numbers in front of these units to multiply the length. If you used `2rem` as a CSS value, that would be twice the font size of the root element which, if not changed from the default, would be 32 pixels (2 times 16 = 32):

```css
h1 {
  font-size: 2rem; /* using default of 16px this would be 32px */
}
```

### Percentage %

Another type of relative length is a percentage value like `25%`. A percentage value is relative to the same measurement of the parent element. Many CSS properties can use percentage values, such as `width`, `height`, `margin`, and `padding`.

For example, if you specified `width: 50%`, that element would be half as wide as its parent element:

```html
<div class="container">
  <header></header>
</div>
```

```css
.container {
  width: 800px;
}
header {
  width: 50%; /* 50% of 800px is 400px */
}
```