# Intro to HTML

HTML stands for **H**yper **T**ext **M**arkup **L**anguage. HTML is a markup language, which means that you take the raw content you want to display and structure it using HTML tags. These tags tell a web browser how to display and structure your content.

Consider the following text:

```
This is a heading! This is a paragraph. This is another paragraph.
```

To the browser, this is all text that has no special meaning.

Now, consider the same text marked up with HTML tags:

```html
<h1>This is a heading!</h1>
<p>This is a paragraph.</p>
<p>This is another paragraph.</p>
```

When the browser parses this document, it sees that you've placed emphasis on the first line of text ("This is a heading!") and that it must be a heading in your document. The next two lines of text are paragraphs and display differently than the first line.

## Getting started

Some of the advantages of doing web development with HTML and CSS are that you can start working with the languages pretty quickly, and they have a fast feedback loop.

To get started, you need a web browser and a text editor, both of which are already installed on your machine. You'll use Visual Studio Code, which is the most popular editor for a variety of languages.

To start working with HTML, you'll need to create a new file called `index.html`.

>**🛈 Note: Why index.html?**
>
>When you visit a website without a document name specified, like http://www.example.com, the server often returns a default document like `index.html`. There are many typical default document names like `default.html` and `index.php`, but one of the most common names is `index.html`.

After you create your `index.html` document, you need to start building out the document's structure.

>**🛈 Note: Whitespace in HTML**
>
>Many of the following HTML samples use indentations and the occasional blank line for the sake of clarity. HTML requires neither indentation nor blank lines. These are examples of "whitespace", which is generally ignored by browsers when reading HTML.