# Handling program errors

Eventually, you'll have to come to terms with two things:

1.  Your users may type "two" when you ask for a number, "yes" when you ask for a boolean, and anything else that you can't anticipate.
2.  You'll make a mistake in your own code that you didn't expect.

Thanks to the compiler, the second one is less likely. When it comes to syntax errors or a data type mismatch, the IDE indicates that something is wrong with your code. Fortunately, your users never see these. These are called **compiler errors**.

**Runtime errors** are different. They occur when the code runs. The IDE and the compiler won't detect logical errors ahead of time for you, nor can they tell you the printer is out of paper. Runtime errors happen for any number of reasons:

-   You go out of bounds when working with an array
-   The input can't be parsed into a valid data type
-   The email address already exists in the database
-   The server is offline or overloaded
-   The file you try to open doesn't exist

These errors are also often called **exceptions**. An exception is an event, which occurs during the running of a program, that disrupts the normal flow of the program's instructions.

You can limit some of these through _defensive programming_ but as a programmer, it's your job to make sure that the ones that you can't prevent don't negatively affect your users' experience.

The last thing that you want your users to see is this error message. They may think something malicious has happened:

```shell
Exception in thread "main" java.lang.NumberFormatException: For input string: "cat"
    at java.base/java.lang.NumberFormatException.forInputString(NumberFormatException.java:65)
    at java.base/java.lang.Integer.parseInt(Integer.java:652)
    at java.base/java.lang.Integer.parseInt(Integer.java:770)
    at com.techelevator.Program.main(Program.java:6)
```