# Raising exceptions

In addition to handling exceptions, you can raise your own exceptions using the `throw` keyword.

The most common scenario where you want to throw your own exception is when your code can't complete what it needs to do. This may be due to a null parameter, a value not in a valid range, or any other possible reason.

As an example, the `Clock` constructor allows you to pass any integer as the hour, minute, and second. You need to indicate when a value isn't within the acceptable value range. If you find one, you can throw an exception:

```java
public class Clock {
    public Clock(int hour, int minute, int second) {
        if (hour > 24 || hour < 0)
            throw new IllegalArgumentException("Hour parameter must be between 0 and 24");
        if (minute > 60 || minute < 0)
            throw new IllegalArgumentException("Minute parameter must be between 0 and 60");
        if (second > 60 || second < 0)
            throw new IllegalArgumentException("Second parameter must be between 0 and 60");

        this.Hour = hour;
        this.Minute = minute;
        this.Second = second;
    }
}
```

## Custom exceptions

You're not limited to working with the system exception classes built into Java. If your application needs additional detail, you can create a custom exception. _This is often the case when you're releasing code for other developers to incorporate._

Consider a hypothetical vending machine. When the customer decides to purchase an item, many things could go wrong:

-   The item is _out of stock_.
-   The customer has _insufficient funds_.
-   The customer selects an _invalid slot_.
-   The vending machine experienced a _mechanical dispensing error_.

Rather than returning `null` or nothing at all, it's possible to throw an exception. The user interface part of your program can determine the best way to display a message to the user, letting them know something went wrong.

## Creating a custom exception

Here are some best practices for creating exceptions:

-   All exceptions inherit from `Exception`.
-   It's a convention to end all custom exceptions with the word `Exception`.
-   The custom exception must define at least these three constructors:
    -   A default constructor.
    -   A constructor that accepts the message property.
    -   A constructor that sets the message property and the "cause" exception.

The following code sample has a custom exception called `InsufficientFundsException`:

```java
public class InsufficientFundsException extends Exception {
    public InsufficientFundsException() {
        super();
    }
    public InsufficientFundsException(String message) {
        super(message);
    }
    public InsufficientFundsException(String message, Exception cause) {
        super(message, cause);
    }
}
```

Usually, you create and throw an exception in a single line of code, like:

```
throw new InsufficientFundsException("balance is short $25.72");
```

Your code can catch this exception using `catch (InsufficientFundsException e)`:

```java
try {
    // ...
}
catch (InsufficientFundsException e) {
    System.out.println(e.getMessage()); // prints "balance is short $25.72"
}
```