# Quiz

**Git 1**
What is Git?

○ A programming language.

○ A database management system.

◉ A version control system.

○ A standard graphics format.

○ A network communications protocol

**Explanation:** Version control systems are a category of software tools that help teams manage changes to source code over time.

---

**Git 2**
What does the command 'git clone' do?

○ It creates a copy of a file in git.

◉ It copies a remote repository to your local computer.

○ It initializes the current directory as a git repository.

○ It makes a backup copy of a folder in your local git repository.

**Explanation:** Technically, `git clone` can make a copy of any Git repository, local or remote. In practical use, developers use `git clone` to copy a remote repo to their local computer so they can make changes to the code.

---

**Git 3**
Which command shows you file changes that are not currently tracked or staged by git?

○ `git inspect`

◉ `git status`

○ `git changes`

○ `git stage`

○ `git fetch`

**Explanation:** `git status` displays new files that haven't been staged, changed files that haven't been staged, and staged files that haven't yet been committed.

---

**Git 4**
Which of these Git commands stages a file called `about-me.txt`?

	Select all correct options

□ `git stage about-me.txt`

■ `git add about-me.txt`

□ `git include --all`

□ `git commit about-me.txt`

■ `git add -A`

**Explanation:** You use `git add` to stage changes to the index. You can specify file paths to be included, or use the `-A` flag to stage all unstaged changes in the local repository.

---

**Git 5**
Which command saves the changes you've staged into to your local Git repository?

○ `git save`

○ `git pull`

○ `git push`

○ `git clone`

◉ `git commit`

**Explanation:** You use `git commit` to write staged changes to the local repository. You must also include a comment, like `git commit -m "Update background image"`.

---

**Git 6**
In a typical development workflow, which of these commands connects to a remote repository?

	Select all correct options

□ `git add`

■ `git clone`

□ `git commit`

■ `git pull`

■ `git push`

□ `git status`

**Explanation:** These are commands you use to synchronize your local work with the work on a remote repository.

---

**Git 7**
You've joined a development team and it's time to make your first set of changes to the product. You've cloned the team's remote repository and are all set to work on your local machine.

Place in order the steps of a typical developer workflow.

▤ Edit local files to make desired changes

▤ `git add -A`

▤ `git commit -m "Add a great product feature"`

▤ `git push origin main`

**Explanation:** You add or change files in the working tree, stage changes to the index, commit changes to the local repository, and push all your commits to the remote repository.
