# Dependency injection

As applications become more complex, the number of classes and dependencies between classes increases. One of the objectives of Object-Oriented Programming is to make it easier to deal with complexity by making code modular.

You can _decompose_ functionality into different classes that each have a specific purpose and responsibility in the system. This way, instead of needing to understand an entire system all at once, you can think about one class at a time.

For example, controller classes commonly use DAOs to store and retrieve data. Up until now, you've created instances of DAOs in a controller like this:

```java
private HotelDao dao;

public HotelController() {
    dao = new MemoryHotelDao();
}
```

When a class uses, or depends on, another class, it's best to focus on _what_ the other class is doing—that is, what service it's providing—rather than _how_ it's doing it. While you can create a DAO in a controller this way, it ties the controller to a specific implementation, like an in-memory DAO implementation rather than a relational database. You should avoid doing this.

Then how can this class depend on another class without creating the object itself?

The technique for doing this is called **Dependency Injection**. Dependency Injection is where a framework (such as Spring) _injects_ instances of required classes into a new object rather than the object itself creating them. This further decouples the classes from each other and allows the controller to be completely independent from any implementation of the DAO interface.

## Configuring dependency injection

In Spring, if you want to inject one class into another, you add an annotation. For the DAOs, you add the `@Component` annotation:

```java
@Component
public class MemoryHotelDao implements HotelDao {
    ...
}
```

Now, the `MemoryHotelDao` class can be injected into other classes, like the controller. To inject the DAO into the controller, you declare a constructor parameter of the class you depend on in the controller like this:

```java
private HotelDao dao;

public HotelController(HotelDao dao) {
    this.dao = dao
}
```

When Spring creates the controller, it also creates an instance of the DAO class with the `@Component` annotation and injects it into the controller for you.

This also makes the controller easier to unit test. When creating a new controller in a unit test, you can pass in a test version of the `HotelDao`:

```java
HotelController testController = new HotelController(new TestHotelDao());
```

This allows the `HotelController` to depend on any `HotelDao` without tying it to a single implementation of `HotelDao`.

## Swapping implementations

Another reason to use dependency injection is if you ever need to change a component—for example, switching database platforms—you can simplify your changes and testing.

If you design the system with dependency injection in mind, you can create a new DAO class that implements the same interface. Since your existing code uses the interface methods and not the class methods, the only code you'd need to change is the class that's provided by the injection.

## Conclusion

Dependency Injection is a powerful feature provided by many application frameworks, but it's an advanced topic that can be confusing at first, even for experienced programmers. For now, focus on the mechanics of injecting dependencies into classes. You'll see more examples of this later on and, over time, you'll become more comfortable with dependency injection.