1. Intro to Objects (Strings) 1
Which of the following declaration statements create a reference type? (Check all that are correct.)

	Select all correct options

□ int x = 5;

□ boolean isOn = true;

■ String message = "Hello";

■ int[] scores = new int[5];

Explanation: Arrays and `String` objects are both reference types, while `int` and `boolean` are primitive types.

---

2. Intro to Objects (Strings) 2
What keyword do you use to create an instance of a class?

Answer: `new`

Explanation: Using `new` creates a new object in memory and returns the address to it.

---

3. Intro to Objects (Strings) 3
When a reference variable doesn't point to an object, its value is (               ).

Answer: `null`

Explanation: When a variable holds the special value `null`, it's also known as a _null reference_.

---

4. Intro to Objects (Strings) 4
You can't change the value of a string.

◉ True

○ False

Explanation: `String` objects are immutable.

---

5. Intro to Objects (Strings) 5
What is the output of this code snippet?

```java
String s1 = "ALL MEN ARE CREATED EQUAL";
String s2 = s1.substring(16, 19);

System.out.println(s2);
```

Answer: `TED`

Explanation: The `substring()` method's first parameter is the index of the character to begin with and the second parameter is the index to copy up to (but not including), so characters 16-18 ("TED") are copied to `s2`.

---

6. Intro to Objects (Strings) 6
What is the value of the `areEqual` variable after this code executes?

```java
char[] awesomeArray = new char[] { 'A', 'w', 'e', 's', 'o', 'm', 'e' };

String awesomeString1 = new String(awesomeArray);
String awesomeString2 = new String(awesomeArray);

boolean areEqual = awesomeString1 == awesomeString2;
```

○ `true`

◉ `false`

Explanation: The strings referenced by `awesomeString1` and `awesomeString2` contain the same characters, but they're stored in different locations on the Heap. To check if two strings contain the same characters, use `.equals()`.

---

7. Intro to Objects (Strings) 7
If the variable `myString` refers to the string "New York, New York", what value does `myString.indexOf("new")` return?

○ `0`

○ `1`

○ `10`

◉ `-1`

Explanation: `myString` does not contain `"new"` (`"new"` and `"New"` do not match) so `myString.indexOf("new")` returns `-1`.

---

8. Intro to Objects (Strings) 8
If the variable `myString` references the string "This is a test", which of the following method calls return `true`?

	Select all correct options

■ `myString.substring(9).contains("t")`

□ `myString.substring(9).startsWith("t")`

■ `myString.substring(9).endsWith("t")`

□ `myString.substring(9).equals("t")`

Explanation: `myString.substring(9)` is `" test"` which contains `"t"` and ends with `"t"`.

---

9. Intro to Objects (Strings) 9
What is the output of this code snippet?

```java
String space = " ";
String[] pets = {"guinea pig", "cat", "dog"};
String joinedPets = String.join(space, pets);
pets = joinedPets.split(space);

System.out.println(pets[2]);
```

○ guinea pig

◉ cat

○ dog

Explanation: After the call to `split()`, the `pets` array contains `{"guinea", "pig", "cat", "dog"}` so "cat" is printed out.

---

10. Intro to Objects (Strings) 10
What is the output of this code snippet?

```java
String city = "Kansas City, Kansas";
city.replace("Kansas", "New York");

System.out.println(city);
```

◉ Kansas City, Kansas

○ New York City, Kansas

○ Kansas City, New York

○ New York City, New York

Explanation: The `replace()` method returns a new string with the replacements (but nothing was done with that returned string in this snippet). The original string is unchanged, so "Kansas City, Kansas" is the output.