# Variables

You'll already be familiar with variables from your work in Java or C#, so some of the following may feel repetitious, but a brief refresher doesn't hurt. Also, there are differences that are unique to JavaScript.

## Variable names

Programming languages tend to be particular when it comes to naming things, and JavaScript is no exception. There are certain rules that you must follow to satisfy JavaScript when naming variables.

### Naming rules for JavaScript variables

-   Variable names consist of letters `A-Z`, `a-z`, characters `_`, `$`, and digits `0-9`.
-   Variable names must start with a letter, `_`, or `$`.
-   Variable names are case-sensitive.
-   Variable names may not be a reserved keyword.

The following are considered best practices in JavaScript:

-   Use camelCase for multi-word variable names.
-   Use uppercase for constants and separate words with an underscore, `_`.
-   Boolean variable names should begin with `is`.

#### Good variable names

| **Name of variable** | **Reason**                                                          |
| -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `result`             | Simple, single word                                                 |
| `firstName`          | Appropriate use of camelCase                                        |
| `isComplete`         | `isComplete` is a boolean, so it follows boolean naming conventions |
| `PI`                 | Pi is a universal constant; uses all uppercase letters              |
| `__grandTotal__`     | Special characters can help make names unique                       |

#### Not good variable names

| **Name of variable** | **Reason**                                                                                |
| -------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `q`                  | Longer variable names are usually preferable to single characters                         |
| `case`               | Invalid; case is a reserved word in JavaScript                                            |
| `2many`              | Invalid; names may not begin with a digit                                                 |
| `max_monkeys`        | Doesn't follow camelCase best practice                                                    |
| `BuildingBlock`      | Doesn't follow the camelCase best practice                                                |
| `notExcludedChars`   | Double negatives hurt to read and understand; perhaps includedCharacters is a better name |
| `helpMe!`            | Invalid; _ and $ are the only special characters allowed in names                         |

## Declaring variables

Now that you know how to name your variables, you can create some. To create a variable, you need to declare it.

There are two ways to declare a variable in JavaScript. In either case, the basic form is the reserved words, `let`, or `const`, a variable name, and a semi-colon, `;`.

>⚠ Danger: Avoid using var
>
>In previous versions of JavaScript, programmers routinely used the `var` reserved word to declare variables. This reserved word, and an even earlier method of declaring a variable by assigning a value to it, are still available in the language to run older, legacy code, _but neither should be used in new code_. Stick with `let` and `const`.

### Using let

You use `let` when you know the value of the variable needs to be changeable. This is its basic form:

```js
// Declare without initializing
let myChangeableValueVariableName;
// Declare and initialize
let firstName = 'Bernice';
```

While you're only required to use `let` followed by a variable name, you may assign a value to any variable while you're declaring it.

>🛈 Note: Writing JavaScript comments
>
>Line comments in JavaScript begin with `//`. They work the same way as line comments in Java and C#.

JavaScript also supports "block" comments `/* */` like Java and C#.

### Using const

The reserved word `const`—short for "constant"—is the alternative to `let`. Variables declared with `const` must be initialized with a value, and can't be reassigned later. Here's an example:

```js
const PI = 3.14159;
```

In modern JavaScript, `const` is the preferred way to declare all variables. You only use `let` when you know the variable needs to be assigned new values, like when the variable serves as a count of something, or a total sum. Otherwise, default to using `const` when declaring a variable. You can always change it to a `let` if needed.

>⚠ Warning: const doesn't prevent all changes
>
>When a variable declared with `const` refers to an object, that variable can't be assigned a different value, but the properties of the object it refers to can still be changed.