# Controllers

As mentioned earlier, you can think of controllers as mediators between models and views. As a go-between, controllers know what model to call to retrieve the data that's needed by the view.

This is what a basic controller class looks like using Spring MVC:

```java
package com.techelevator.todo.controllers;

@RestController
public class TodoController {

    private List<String> todos;

    public TodoController() {
        todos = new ArrayList<>(Arrays.asList("Wake up", "Shower", "Drive to work"));
    }

    @RequestMapping(path = "/todos", method = RequestMethod.GET)
    public List<String> getTodos() {
        return todos;
    }

    @RequestMapping(path = "/todos/{id}", method = RequestMethod.GET)
    public String getTodo(@PathVariable int id) {
        return dao.getTodo(id);
    }

    @RequestMapping(path = "/todos", method = RequestMethod.POST)
    public void addTodo(String task) {
        if (task != null) {
            todos.add(task);
        }
    }

}
```

Hopefully, most of this looks familiar to you as there are classes, instance variables, constructors, and methods. What might not be familiar are the `@`-words scattered throughout the class. These are called **annotations**.

>**🛈 Note: What's an annotation?**
>
>An **annotation** is a tag that's used to associate metadata with code blocks such as classes, methods, and variables. The compiler and runtime use this metadata to apply certain properties and features to the code block the annotation is used on. When an annotation is applied to a code block, the code is said to be "decorated" with the annotation.  
  >
>You can apply one or more annotations to nearly any block of code, but some annotations can only be applied to certain blocks—for example, you can only use the `@RestController` annotation on a class. Annotations often have optional elements you can provide values for, like the `method` element of the `@RequestMapping` annotation in the example code.

The following sections describe the different parts that make up the controller code.

## Naming conventions

By convention, all of your controllers are contained in the same package, in this case, `com.techelevator.todo.controllers`. Although you can create the controller anywhere, convention says it's a good idea to organize them together in the same package, or namespace, so that other developers can immediately understand what this code does.

Now that you know where your controllers live, what should you name them?

The name of the class represents what resource it manages, such as User, Project, or Todo. It also contains the word "Controller" at the end. Here are a few good names for controllers:

-   `UserController.java`
-   `ProjectController.java`
-   `TodoController.java`

## Rest controller

However, the name of the controller isn't enough to indicate to Spring that this is a controller class. You must decorate the class with the `@RestController` annotation:

```java
@RestController
public class TodoController {

}
```

With the `@RestController` annotation in place, this class can receive incoming web requests.

## Handler methods

Controller methods annotated with `@RequestMapping` are called **handler methods**. There are two handler methods in this controller: one that returns a list of todos and one that adds a new todo:

```java
@RestController
public class TodoController {

    @RequestMapping(path = "/todos", method = RequestMethod.GET)
    public List<String> getTodos() {
        return todos;
    }

    @RequestMapping(path = "/todos/{id}", method = RequestMethod.GET)
    public String getTodo(@PathVariable int id) { //@PathVariable covered later in unit
        return dao.getTodo(id);
    }

    @RequestMapping(path = "/todos", method = RequestMethod.POST)
    public void addTodo(String task) {
        if (task != null) {
            todos.add(task);
        }
    }

}
```

## `@RequestMapping` elements

The `@RequestMapping` annotation has several elements that define which web requests the handler method responds to.

### `@RequestMapping(path=)`

The `path` element corresponds to the HTTP request path. In the example, both `getTodos()` and `addTodo()` are called for requests to the `/todos` request path.

### `@RequestMapping(method=)`

The `method` element specifies which HTTP request method, like `GET`, `POST`, or `PUT`, this handler method is used for.

#### `RequestMethod.GET`

The `RequestMethod.GET` argument specifies that the handler method runs when a `GET` request is received. The following code maps the `getTodos()` handler method to a `GET` request for `/todos`:

```java
  @RequestMapping(path = "/todos", method = RequestMethod.GET)
  public List<String> getTodos() {
      return todos;
  }
```

Visiting the path `/todos` calls the `getTodos()` method and returns the list of todos in JSON format:

```json
[
    "Wake up",
    "Shower",
    "Drive to work"
]
```

#### `RequestMethod.POST`

Like `RequestMethod.GET`, the `RequestMethod.POST` argument specifies that the handler method runs when a `POST` request is received. In this example, the `addTodo()` method is mapped to a `POST` request for `/todos`:

```java
@RequestMapping(path = "/todos", method = RequestMethod.POST)
public void addTodo(String task) {
    //
}
```

>**✔ Tip: Share the RequestMapping across handler methods**
>
Rather than redundantly specify the same path for all the handler methods, you can establish a shared base path by annotating the controller class.
>
>```java
>@RestController
>@RequestMapping("/todos") // Shared base path for all handler methods
>public class TodoController {
>
>    @RequestMapping(method = RequestMethod.GET)
>    public List<String> getTodos() {
>        return todos;
>    }
>
>    // Extend the base path with an id parameter
>    @RequestMapping(path = "/{id}", method = RequestMethod.GET)
>    public String getTodo(@PathVariable int id) { //@PathVariable covered later in unit
>        return dao.getTodo(id);
>    }
>
>    @RequestMapping(method = RequestMethod.POST)
>    public void addTodo(String task) {
>        if (task != null) {
>            todos.add(task);
>        }
>    }
>
>}
>```
>
>The base path may be extended on a method-by-method basis. For example, the `path="/{id}"` string in the `@RequestMapping(path="/{id}", ...)` extends the base path to `/todos/{id}` for the `getTodo()` handler method.

>**✔ Tip: Specify a request method**
>
>If you don't specify an HTTP request method, a handler method maps to all request methods. So, it's best to be specific with your intentions.