# Access modifiers

The keywords `public` and `private` are two of the most common access modifiers in the Java language. Access modifiers control visibility to methods and properties from the rest of your program.

## Public
The modifier keyword `public` marks something as publicly accessible, meaning other code can use or invoke it.

By making the `Clock` class public, any other code that references the `Clock` class can instantiate it.

Marking a property or method `public` indicates that any external caller can use it. An external caller may be an outside program, or another class within the application itself.

## Private
The `private` access modifier restricts access to a property or method. Private variables and methods are only visible from within the class that it's declared in.

In the `Clock` example, the class variables `hour`, `minute`, and `second` are all designated `private`. If you try to access them through an instance of your class, you receive a compiler error.

This allows you to hide your implementation away from users or outside callers of the class. Because it's only exposed through the getter and setter methods, you can restrict the values, access to the variable, or both:

```java
// Clock.java
public class Clock {
    private int hour;
    private int minute;
    private int second;

    public Clock(int hour, int minute, int second) {
        this.hour = hour;
        this.minute = minute;
        this.second = second;
    }

     public void setHour(int hour) {
        if(hour >= 1 && hour <= 24) {
            this.hour = hour;
        }
    }

    public void setMinute(int minute) {
        if(minute >=0 && minute < 60) {
            this.minute = minute;
        }
    }

    public void setSecond(int second) {
        if(second >=0 && second < 60) {
            this.second = second;
        }
    }

    public int getHour() {
        return this.hour;
    }

    public int getMinute() {
        return this.minute;
    }

    public int getSecond() {
        return this.second;
    }
}
```

```java
// Program.java
public static void main(String[] args) {
    // Creates a new clock initialized at 11:17:42
    Clock grandfather = new Clock(11, 17, 42);

    grandfather.hour = 12; //<-- not allowed, the instance variable is private
    grandfather.setHour(12); //<-- is allowed, the instance method is public
}
```

If it helps, think about classes as something seen from the outside, not the inside. `public` is what other programmers can see and is for things that can help someone perform a task.

However, programmers don't need to see everything—for example, the code that makes things work under the hood. In those cases, keep things private so that they're only accessible from within the class.

>✔ Tip: Use access modifiers for encapsulation
>
>Access modifiers are another key feature of **encapsulation**. You can use access modifiers to restrict access to the internal mechanisms of how the class works by hiding or protecting its variables. This way, the values remain consistent and can only be changed through methods that the class allows external resources to have access to. In this way, a class controls how it's used and makes sure that use is consistent with its purpose.

For example, rather than having the user of the clock be able to change the second, minute, and hour manually, the clock receives an initial time when it's created, and internally manages the values when it ticks. Ideally, this limits the risk of bugs that appear in your code.
