# Using npm

NPM packages are installed and run with the use of the `npm` command-line application.

The `npm` command offers many features, but this guide covers only some of the basics.

The examples in this lesson use this sample `package.json`:

```json
{
  "name": "server",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "scripts": {
    "start": "json-server data.json",
    "reset": "json-server reset.js"
  },
  "dependencies": {
    "faker": "^4.1.0",
    "json-server": "^0.16.1"
  }
}
```

## Installing project dependencies

When you start working on an existing project, you'll usually need to download and install all dependencies the project uses. In this example, there are two dependencies—`faker` and `json-server`.

From the command line, while in the same folder as the `package.json` file, you run this to install all dependencies:

```shell
npm install
```

You'll see `npm` download and extract all packages specified in `package.json`, as well as any dependencies they may have. Depending on the size of the project and the speed of the internet connection, this may take some time.

When it's done, `npm` prints out a summary similar to this:

```
added 230 packages from 125 contributors and audited 230 packages in 7.963s
```

## Installing a package

To add a new package, you use the same command but also specify the package name. To install the [`cowsay`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/cowsay) package, you run this command:

```shell
npm install cowsay
```

Running that command installs the latest version of the package, which for `cowsay` is version 1.5.0 at the time of this writing.

If you wanted an older version, for example 1.3.1, you can specify the version too:

```shell
npm install cowsay@1.3.1
```

### Installing globally

You can also install a package **globally**, which means that it can be run from anywhere on your computer and doesn't belong to a project. This is useful for utility packages that you may use on different projects.

To install globally, you use the `-g` option:

```shell
npm install -g cowsay
```

You can specify versions for global installs too:

```shell
npm install -g cowsay@1.3.1
```

You may need administrator permissions to install a global package:

-   Windows: you need to launch your shell application by using the **Run as administrator** option, usually available by right-clicking on the application.
    
-   macOS and Linux: you can use `sudo` in front of the command: `sudo npm install -g cowsay`.
    

>**⚠ Danger: Be very careful with `sudo`.**
>
>`sudo` stands for "superuser do" and allows you to run commands as the "superuser", or administrator, of Unix-like operating systems. You can damage important operating system files with it if you're not careful, so make sure you know what you're doing when you use it.

## Running tasks

In `package.json`, the `scripts` section specifies the various tasks that `npm` can run. The tasks that are available, and what they do, may vary depending on what you have installed. They're typically used for building projects and running tests, but anything that relies on an NPM package can be specified here.

To run the `start` script from the earlier example, you use this command:

```shell
npm run start
```

That command instructs `npm` to run the `json-server` package, passing `data.json` to it as a parameter. Most packages can't be run directly on the command line. They have to be run through `npm`.

If you want to know what scripts are available, you can run `npm run` without a name and it'll display a list of available scripts:

```shell
npm run
...
  start
    json-server data.json
  reset
    json-server reset.js
```

### Running a global package

When you install a global package, `npm` automatically provides a script that you _can_ run on the command line.

If you installed `cowsay` globally, like in [the earlier example](https://lms.techelevator.com/cohorts/94/blocks/5/content_files/npm/05-using-npm.md#installing-globally), you can then run it from the command line:

```shell
cowsay "I love NPM!"
 _____________
< I love NPM! >
 -------------
        \   ^__^
         \  (oo)\_______
            (__)\       )\/\
                ||----w |
                ||     ||
```
