# Interfaces

In Java, interfaces require classes to implement public methods that can be used in a specific way. Interfaces provide you with a way to say what classes can do and as such are an alternative way to define an **_is a_** relationship.

The following code shows how to define an interface:

```java
public interface Alarmable {
    void setAlarm(int hour, int minute);
}
```

In the definition of the interface, there's no implementation for the methods. There's only a method declaration with no body and no access modifier. That's what an interface is: a declaration of one or more public methods.

After definition, classes implement those interfaces. Think of an interface as a contract. If a class wishes to implement an interface, it must agree to provide implementations for all methods defined by the interface:

```java
public class AlarmClock extends Clock implements Alarmable {

    public void setAlarm(int hour, int minute) {
        /* implementation for set alarm method on alarm clock*/
    }

}

public class Phone implements Alarmable {

    public void setAlarm(int hour, int minute) {
        /* implementation for set alarm method on phone */
    }
}
```

A class, if necessary, can implement more than one interface. For example, suppose there's also a `Textable` interface which describes the capability to send and receive SMS messages. `Phone` can implement both interfaces:

```java
public class Phone implements Alarmable, Textable {
    ...
```

In this case, `Phone` needs to provide code for all of the methods defined in both the `Alarmable` and `Textable` interfaces.

>🛈 Warning: Interface instantiation
>
>Interfaces don't get instantiated. In other words, you can't use the `new` operator on an interface. You can only use the `new` operator on a class which **_implements_** the interface.

Now that you've defined the interface, it's available as a data type that you can use to reference an existing object. In this sense, you can adjust the `Shopkeeper` class and eliminate the duplicate methods by programming the `setAlarm()` method against an interface and not the concrete classes:

```java
public class Shopkeeper {

    // setAlarm() accepts any object that implements the Alarmable interface
    public void setAlarm(Alarmable alarm) {
        alarm.setAlarm(08, 00); // set the alarm to 8 o'clock
    }
}
```

>🛈 Note: Polymorphism and interfaces
>
>With respect to interfaces, polymorphism means **_if B is a class that implements interface A and a function can accept A as a parameter, it can also accept B_**.
