# What's polymorphism?

In this unit, you'll learn about the last principle of object-oriented programming: polymorphism.

> _The word polymorphism, derived from the Greek language, means "the ability to have multiple forms."_
> 
> _In object-oriented programming, polymorphism is the idea that something can be assigned a different meaning or usage based on its context. This specifically allows variables and objects to take on more than one form._

Here's an analogy to help you understand this term. Suppose someone told you, "go to the store and buy your favorite food for dinner."

What happens next depends on some context:

-   If you were 14 years old, you might ride your bike to the store and use the cash in your pocket to pay for a pizza and a 2-liter bottle of soda pop.
-   As an adult, you might _drive to the store_ and using the credit card in your wallet, pay for pecan chicken and wine.

In both cases, the person making the request said the same thing: "go to the store and buy your favorite food for dinner." However, the result differed depending on the subject receiving the request.

Often, you want to write code that can make a basic request, and based on context, allow different behaviors to take place. Polymorphism means you can write one generic method call that uses whatever specific version of that method is appropriate when it runs.

As you'll see, polymorphism supports code extensibility. If you write polymorphic code, you have generic code that avoids being tied to the details of a particular object's class. This allows programmers to incorporate changes through new object types in the system without modifying existing code.