# NPM

**NPM** is a package manager for JavaScript code. It's one of the most widely used package managers in software development and is often touted as having the largest repository.

Its name is short for **Node.js Package Manager**. Node.js is a runtime environment for running complex applications in JavaScript without a browser.

NPM packages are written in JavaScript. Some packages provide code that can be imported into another JavaScript application, while others provide a tool or utility that runs with the help of Node.js. Most packages have instructions that are bundled with it or available online that explain how to use it.

## The `package.json` file

NPM stores the information of the packages you use for a project in a file named `package.json`. This file also usually contains other information about the project like its name and version.

An example `package.json` file might look like this:

```json
{
  "name": "my-project",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "A Vue.js project",
  "private": true,
  "scripts": {
    "serve": "vue-cli-service serve",
    "build": "vue-cli-service build",
    "test:unit": "vue-cli-service test:unit"
  },
  "dependencies": {
    "core-js": "^3.6.5",
    "vue": "^2.6.11"
  },
  "devDependencies": {
    "@vue/cli-plugin-babel": "~4.5.0",
    "@vue/cli-plugin-unit-mocha": "~4.5.0",
    "@vue/cli-service": "~4.5.0",
    "@vue/test-utils": "^1.0.3",
    "chai": "^4.1.2",
    "vue-template-compiler": "^2.6.11"
  }
}
```

The `package.json` file can contain a lot of different information, but it's important to at least become familiar with the `scripts` and `dependencies` sections.

The `scripts` section contains `npm` commands that you run from the command line to perform tasks like building the application and running tests. You'll learn about `npm` commands later in this unit.

The `dependencies` section contains all the packages that you've added to your project. The similarly named `devDependencies` is for packages only needed for development, like unit testing frameworks. Each key-value pair represents an NPM package and the desired version.

>🛈 Note: about NPM version syntax
>
>You may have seen version numbers like `1.7.2` and `14.6` before, but what about `~4.5.0` or `^1.0.3`?
>
>The `~` and `^` indicate the update types your project can accept:
>
>-   A version like `~1.13.0` means you want to update only the last decimal, called patch releases. `1.13.1` is okay, but `1.14.0` isn't.
>-   A version like `^1.13.0` means you want to update patch and minor releases. `1.13.1` and `1.14.0` is okay, but `2.0` or higher isn't.
>-   Not using either, like `1.13.0`, means that's the exact version to use, and no other versions are acceptable.

There's another related file named `package-lock.json`. This file is like the dependencies stored in `package.json` but it tracks the **exact** version of every package that's installed. The version in `package.json` might be `^1.13.0`, but `package-lock.json` tracks that version `1.16.2` is being used. This is so that a product is 100% reproducible in the same way.

Typically, you don't edit either file directly. They're updated by `npm`.

The `package.json` and `package-lock.json` files are normally added to source control, so other developers on the project can use the same setup.

## The `node_modules` folder

The packages that you install for a project are stored in the `node_modules` folder at the root of your project directory. Like with the `package.json`, you likely won't need to directly interact with anything in the folder, unless you're doing some low-level troubleshooting.

Unlike the `package.json` and `package-lock.json` files, the `node_modules` folder isn't added to source control. This folder can be several hundred megabytes or even gigabytes, and the entire contents can be reproduced on another developer's computer because of the `package.json` and `package-lock.json` files.

## NPM package registry

NPM provides a web interface to look up and research packages at their [website](https://www.npmjs.com/) .
