# SQL injection

One of the main ways that data is stolen or destroyed in web applications is through an attack called a SQL Injection Attack. A SQL Injection attack is an attack where a malicious attacker passes a special value into your application that is executed by the database, causing it to retrieve or delete information that the attacker shouldn't have access to.

This is possible—as are all injection style attacks—because the value that makes the SQL bad doesn't affect the rest of the application at all.

## Example: accessing chat logs

Imagine that you're building a new application that handles corporate chat logs in a SQL database. Each chat message has the following information:

| **to** | **from** | **message**                                        |
| ------ | -------- | -------------------------------------------------- |
| Joe    | Chen     | Good morning. How was your weekend?                |
| Maria  | Joe      | Definitely planning to get that report done today. |
| Chen   | Maria    | Which accounts are being closed tomorrow?          |
| Maria  | Chen     | Accounts 1234, 5678, and 9012                      |

When Joe goes to his page, he can see his messages, or even search them. A SQL statement selects his messages given his search query like this:

```sql
SELECT to, from, message FROM messages WHERE (to='joe' OR from='joe') AND
    message LIKE '%morning%';
```

In the DAO, you could have a line like this:

```java
"SELECT to, from, message FROM messages WHERE (to='" + username +
    "' OR from='" + username + "') AND message LIKE '%" + search + "%'";
```

If the value of `username` is "Joe" and `search` is "morning", this would return these rows:

| **to** | **from** | **message**                         |
| ------ | -------- | ----------------------------------- |
| Joe    | Chen     | Good morning. How was your weekend? |

This application could run just fine for years without anyone knowing about how insecure this is. But imagine that a user has the ability to set that `search` to whatever they want. That's a reasonable expectation.

If Joe sets `search` to "report", he would get:

| **to** | **from** | **message**                                        |
| ------ | -------- | -------------------------------------------------- |
| Maria  | Joe      | Definitely planning to get that report done today. |

But he could set the search query to anything. If he knows how SQL works, he might send the following search:

```sql
O'Malley
```

This generates the SQL:

```sql
SELECT to, from, message FROM messages WHERE (to='Joe' OR from='Joe') AND
    message LIKE '%O'Malley%';
```

This causes a syntax error. It might even print an error message on the screen. This tells Joe that there's a problem in the SQL. Now, Joe can exploit it.

He could send the following search:

```sql
%' OR 1=1 --
```

While this looks like gibberish, it's actually a very carefully crafted attack. If that gets put into the SQL using concatenation and then sent to the SQL server, the statement looks like this:

```sql
SELECT to, from, message FROM messages WHERE (to='joe' OR from='joe') AND
    message LIKE '%%' OR 1=1 --%';
```

In other words, select messages where the to or from are "Joe" and the message is empty **or select everything**. That `1=1` is always going to be true, which means it always returns the row, and Joe gets to see all the messages:

| **to** | **from**                                        | **message**                                        |
| ------ | ----------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------- |
| Joe    | Chen                                            | Good morning. How was your weekend?                |
| Maria  | Joe                                             | Definitely planning to get that report done today. |
| Chen   | Maria\Which accounts are being closed tomorrow? |                                                    |
| Maria  | Chen                                            | Accounts 1234, 5678, and 9012                      |

The `1=1` attack is a way for attackers to get every single record out of a database, whether they own it or not.

If Joe was malicious, he could even send a search like this:

```sql
%'; DELETE FROM messages; --
```

That runs the following statement:

```sql
SELECT to, from, message FROM messages WHERE (to='joe' OR from='joe') AND
    message LIKE '%%'; DELETE FROM messages; --%';
```

This empties the entire messages table from the database. Unless the site has a backup, the data is gone forever. Even if the site has a backup, it may require significant downtime to get everything back to the way it was.

All of this is happening because you're using one programming language to write another programming language. Injection attacks are possible because what is harmless in one language is destructive in the other. If the programmer isn't watching for it, it'll come back to bite them.

You can write this in your backend language and never cause a problem:

```sql
String search = "%'; DELETE FROM messages; --";
```

But if that string is included in a SQL statement, it can destroy a large part of your application.

## Preventing SQL injection attacks

As you can see, these kinds of attacks are bad news. So how do you protect yourself from them?

Luckily, you've already been taught how. When you saw how to generate SQL from Java, you saw what are called [prepared statements or parameterized statements](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prepared_statement) . You should always use that approach, and never concatenate strings together to form a SQL statement.

### Spring Database `JdbcTemplate`

In Java, you have the `JdbcTemplate` class to use to make prepared statement calls to your database. By using SQL statements with `?` placeholders in them, you let the SQL database put the values into the SQL statement instead of doing it in Java. The SQL database knows how to merge these two values into a safe SQL statement that won't retrieve unauthorized information or destroy your data.

If you wrote your statement from before as a prepared statement, it would look like this:

```java
String sqlSearchMessages = "SELECT to, from, message FROM messages " +
    "WHERE (to=? OR from=?) AND message LIKE ?";
```

Then, you could call your SQL statement with the following code:

```java
SqlRowSet results = jdbcTemplate.queryForRowSet(sqlSearchMessages, username, username, "%" + search + "%");
```

How does this fix the problem? Because now you aren't building the whole SQL statement in your code. Instead, you're making your prepared statement, giving that to the server and then telling the server, "Put these values in the placeholders that are set up." Since the SQL server understands SQL, it can insert the values into the statement in a way that treats the value as a string and not as part of the statement.

Using prepared statements, if an attacker sent the string:

```sql
%'; DELETE FROM messages; --
```

The database wouldn't execute the `DELETE` statement, but would instead search for the literal string `%'; DELETE FROM messages; --` in the messages and, not finding any, return nothing.

>**⚠ Warning: Be careful with queries involving data from users**
>
>Always use prepared statements. Never concatenate user-provided data onto your SQL statements.