# Quiz

1. Collections (Part 1) - Lists, Stacks, Queues 1
Select the ways a `List` differs from an array (select all that apply):

	Select all correct options

■ A `List`'s length doesn't need to be declared.

□ Each element can hold a different data type in a `List`.

■ You can add or remove elements from the middle of a `List`.

□ You can't access a `List` element at a particular index.

■ You use a different method to retrieve the number of elements in a `List`.

Explanation: 
-   A `List` grows and shrinks as it's needed, unlike an array that has a fixed length.
-   `List`s have methods that you can use to add and remove elements from the middle of a `List`, unlike arrays.
-   `List`s have a different method for retrieving the number of elements.

---

2. Collections (Part 1) - Lists, Stacks, Queues 2
What does the `<T>` indicate when used like `List<T>`?

○ It means that it's a collection.

○ The `List` can only hold a data type called `T`.

◉ You need to specify a data type in place of `T`.

○ Nothing. It's a typo.

Explanation: The `T` is a placeholder for a data type to be specified by the developer. The data type goes in the angle brackets `<>`.

---

3. Collections (Part 1) - Lists, Stacks, Queues 3
Given this `List` declaration, how do you write a foreach loop to iterate through its elements?

```java
List<Integer> scores = new ArrayList<Integer>(Arrays.asList(80, 94, 81, 75, 91, 98, 84));
```

○ `for (each score in scores)`

◉ `for (Integer score : scores)`

○ `for (score in scores)`

○ `for (scores => score)`

Explanation: This is the correct syntax for a foreach loop.

---

4. Collections (Part 1) - Lists, Stacks, Queues 4
What method do you use to get the number of elements in a `List`?

○ `length()`

○ `amount()`

◉ `size()`

○ `count()`

Explanation: This is the correct method.

---

5. Collections (Part 1) - Lists, Stacks, Queues 5
Given a `List<String>`, what does the following line of code do?

```java
myList.add(1, "My Text");
```

○ Adds "My Text" as the first item in `myList`.

◉ Adds "My Text" as the second item in `myList`.

○ Adds the values `1` and "My Text" to `myList`.

○ Overwrites the element at that position in `myList`.

Explanation: This is correct. The 1 indicates the zero-based index of where to insert the item.

---

6. Collections (Part 1) - Lists, Stacks, Queues 6
Given this `List` declaration, how do you access the _third_ item?

```java
List<String> animals = 
    new ArrayList<String>(Arrays.asList("Dog", "Cat", "Fish", "Bear"));
```

◉ `animals.get(2)`

○ `animals.get(3)`

○ `animals.get("Fish")`

○ `animals[2]`

Explanation: Correct. `List's` are zero-based indexes like arrays, so you use the `get()` method.

---

7. Collections (Part 1) - Lists, Stacks, Queues 7
You can use a foreach loop on not only `List`s, but arrays too.

◉ True

○ False