# Quiz

**Collections (Part 2) - Maps 1**

A `Map` is:

○ An unordered collection of objects that have unique values.

○ An ordered collection that has indexes and acts much like an array.

◉ An unordered collection of key-value pairs.

○ An ordered collection whose size can't change.

**Explanation:** This is the correct description of a `Map`.

---

**Collections (Part 2) - Maps 2**

True or false: the key and value of a `Map` must be the same data type.

○ True

◉ False

**Explanation:** The key and value can be different data types.

---

**Collections (Part 2) - Maps 3**

Given this `Map` declaration, how do you write a foreach loop to iterate through its elements?

```java
Map<String, Integer> petAges = new HashMap<String, Integer>();
petAges.put("Mo", 14);
petAges.put("Quill", 12);
petAges.put("Tuxedo", 8);
```

○ `for (Map.Entry<String, Integer> petAge : petAges)`

◉ `for (Map.Entry<String, Integer> petAge : petAges.entrySet())`

○ `for (Map.Entry<String, Integer> petAge in petAges)`

○ `for (petAges.entrySet() => Map.Entry<String, Integer> petAge)`

**Explanation:** This is the correct syntax for a foreach loop.

---

**Collections (Part 2) - Maps 4**

What happens when the following code executes?

```java
Map<String, Integer> animalNumberLegs = new HashMap<>();
animalNumberLegs.put("Dog", 4);
animalNumberLegs.put("Fish", 0);
animalNumberLegs.put("Bear", 2);

animalNumberLegs.put("bear", 4); // Bears actually have 4 legs.

int numberOfLegs = 0;
numberOfLegs = animalNumberLegs.get("Bear");

if (numberOfLegs > 0) {
  Console.WriteLine("Bears have " + numberOfLegs + " legs.");
}
```

○ The number of bear legs isn't displayed on the console.

○ `Bears have 4 legs.` is displayed on the console.

◉ `Bears have 2 legs.` is displayed on the console.

○ `Bears have 0 legs.` is displayed on the console.

**Explanation:** Since `Map` keys are case-sensitive, `"bear"` and `"Bear"` are distinct and separate keys. `animalNumberLegs.put("bear",4)` adds a new key-value pair `"bear":4`, while the existing `"Bear"` remains untouched and continues to have a value of `2`.

---

**Collections (Part 2) - Maps 5**

Given the following code, how do you access the key and value of `testScore`?

```java
Map<String, Integer> testScores = new HashMap<String, Integer>();
testScores.put("Alice", 98);
testScores.put("Bob", 87);
testScores.put("Charlie", 77);

for (Map.Entry<String, Integer> testScore : testScores.entrySet()) {
    System.out.println("Key: " + /*fill in code*/);
    System.out.println("Value: " + /*fill in code*/);
}
```

○ `testScore[0]` and `testScore[1]`

◉ `testScore.getKey()` and `testScore.getValue()`

○ `testScore[key]` and `testScore[value]`

○ `testScore.key` and `testScore.value`

**Explanation:** This is the correct syntax for accessing the key and value of a `Map.Entry`.

---

**Collections (Part 2) - Maps 6**

How do you determine if the key "Dave" exists in the given `Map`?

```java
Map<String, String> people = new HashMap<String, String>();
```

○ `people.getKey("Dave")`

○ `people.hasKey("Dave")`

○ `people.keyExists("Dave")`

◉ `people.containsKey("Dave")`

**Explanation:** This is the correct method and way to check for a key's existence.

---

**Collections (Part 2) - Maps 7**

Given this `Map` declaration, what's the return value for `booksYearPublished.remove("The Wonderful Wizard of Oz")`?

```java
Map<String, Integer> booksYearPublished = new HashMap<String, Integer>();
testScores.put("A Tale of Two Cities", 1859);
testScores.put("The Three Musketeers", 1844);
testScores.put("Childhood's End", 1953);
```

○ `false`

○ `0`

◉ `null`

○ An error occurs and the program stops.

**Explanation:** This is the correct value returned for a key that's not in a `Map`. If the key exists, the associated value is returned.
