# Deleting rows

Sometimes you want to delete data from the database and remove it completely. You can do this with a `DELETE` statement:

```
DELETE FROM country
WHERE code = 'HND';
```

This deletes any row from the database that matches the `WHERE` clause.

>**⚠ Danger: Be sure of what you're deleting**
>
>As stated with `UPDATE` statements, if you leave off the `WHERE` clause on a `DELETE` statement, all the rows in the table get deleted. There is no undo in SQL, at least not yet, _so once they're gone, they're gone._
>
>It's better to write a `SELECT` statement first, make sure those are the rows you want to delete, and then change it to a `DELETE` statement afterwards.

This is the standard format of a `DELETE` statement:

```
DELETE FROM table_name
WHERE condition;
```

>**🛈 Note: In most real world applications, you don't delete often**
>
>In most real applications, you don't delete a lot of data. Data is valuable and keeping data that you don't need anymore can have its advantages. If a customer calls and says that they accidentally deleted something they didn't mean to, you'll be glad you kept it in the database.
>
>So how are deletes handled then? Usually, you have a boolean column like `enabled` or `deleted`, or a date column like `deleted_date`, and set that when you want something "deleted." Then all of your `SELECT` statements can look for that when pulling data from the database.
>
>You can retrieve all users accounts from a database that haven't been deleted like this:
>
>```sql
>SELECT * FROM user_account
>WHERE deleted_date IS NULL;
>```