# Introduction

You've learned in previous units that classes can inherit properties and methods from other classes. In this unit you'll learn how to use the keywords `abstract`, `final`, and `protected` to manage inheritance.

You'll often need to work with classes you didn't create. Understanding the requirements and restrictions a class places on inheritance helps you use the class in the way its designer intended.

When you're designing a new class, you can require other classes to implement certain methods, prevent other classes from overriding certain methods, and control which properties and methods child classes can access. Doing those things is an important way to communicate with other developers and helps ensure they use your code correctly.

---

# Requiring inheritance

## Abstract classes

An **abstract class** is a class that you can't create an instance of. To use an abstract class, you must inherit from it. In contrast, a regular class that you can create an instance of is sometimes referred to as a **concrete class**.

When would you want a class you can't create an instance of? One of the main benefits of inheritance is that when several classes have properties and methods in common, you can avoid repetition of those common features by putting them in a superclass. Often it doesn't make sense to ever create an instance of that superclass since it's too general to be useful on its own.

For example, an insurance company may offer automotive, homeowner's, and renter's policies. Each kind of policy would have an associated class to keep track of its unique features, but they would also have some properties and methods in common like a `policyHolder` property and an `addClaim()` method. An `InsurancePolicy` superclass would be a good place for those common features. For example:

```java
public class InsurancePolicy {
    private Person policyHolder;
    // other common properties...

    public void addClaim(Claim newClaim) {
        // ...
    }

    // Getters, setters, etc.
}
```

Then the various policy classes would all extend `InsurancePolicy` like this:

```java
public class AutomotivePolicy extends InsurancePolicy {
    private String vehicleIdentificationNumber;
    private int modelYear;
    private boolean hasAntiTheftSystem;
    // other properties specific to an AutomotivePolicy...

    // Getters, setters, etc.
}
```

As the designer of these classes, you'd want to make it clear to other developers that they need to create instances of specific child classes like `AutomotivePolicy`, rather than `InsurancePolicy`. To do this, you make `InsurancePolicy` an abstract class by adding the keyword `abstract` to the class declaration:

```java
public abstract class InsurancePolicy {
    private Person policyHolder;
    // other common properties...

    public void addClaim(Claim newClaim) {
        // ...
    }

    // Getters, setters, etc.
}
```

Now if someone tries to create an instance of an `InsurancePolicy`, they'll get a compiler error to let them know they're not using this class correctly.

>✔ Tip: Use abstract class variables for polymorphism
>
>Even though you can't create an instance of an abstract class, you can still declare a variable of that class, which allows polymorphism through inheritance.

## Abstract methods

An **abstract method** is a method with no implementation that's declared in an abstract class. Any concrete class that extends the abstract class must override the abstract method and provide an implementation for it.

Abstract methods are useful when an abstract class's children have some behavior in common, but the details of that behavior vary. For example, as the designer of the `InsurancePolicy` class, you might need to make sure that every type of insurance policy has a `calculateAnnualPremium()` method, while allowing different calculations for each type. You can accomplish that by declaring the method with the `abstract` keyword, like this:

```java
public abstract class InsurancePolicy {
    // ...

    public abstract BigDecimal calculateAnnualPremium();
    // Note that there is no method body.

    // ...
}
```

Now, any concrete class that inherits from `InsurancePolicy` must provide an implementation for that method. So if another developer later creates a new child class of `InsurancePolicy` to represent pet insurance or travel insurance, their code won't compile until they provide an appropriate `calculateAnnualPremium()` method in their new class.

## Abstract classes and interfaces

This idea of requiring a class to implement certain methods may sound familiar from when you learned previously about interfaces. So what's the difference?

-   A class can only inherit from one other class, but it can implement any number of interfaces.
-   An abstract class can provide implementations for some or all of its methods, while an interface normally doesn't provide any.
-   All of an interface's methods are public, while an abstract class can declare methods with any access modifier.

The implication of these differences is that an interface provides a lightweight way to use potentially unrelated classes together for a particular purpose, while an abstract class provides a way to share code within a similarly structured set of classes.

Abstract classes and interfaces aren't mutually exclusive, either. It's entirely possible for a class to both extend an abstract class and implement several interfaces.

---

# Restricting inheritance

## Final classes

A **final class** is a class that other classes can't inherit from. You'll get a compiler error if you specify that one of your classes extends a final class.

You declare a final class just like any other class, and add the keyword `final`:

```java
public final class Example {
    // Properties and methods can be declared normally,
    // but no other class can extend this one.
}
```

It's unlikely you'll need to create final classes very often, but it's important to know what a final class is because some very commonly used classes are final classes. For example, the `String` class is a final class. You can't create new child classes of `String`.

So why would the designers of the `String` class have restricted inheriting from it in that way? One reason is to guarantee that a `String` is always immutable. Making it a final class prevents problems that could result if a programmer was able to create their own mutable version of a `String` through inheritance and then pass it as a `String` to methods that assume immutability.

## Final methods

A **final method** is a method that a child class can't override. The child class inherits the method as-is and can't provide a different implementation of it.

When designing a class, you can make a method final to communicate that the method needs to remain unchanged, and that you expect child classes to customize their behavior in other ways.

Consider the `InsurancePolicy` example. You've created the `InsurancePolicy` class with an abstract `calculateAnnualPremium()` method that each child class must override, and are now adding a `calculateMonthlyPayment()` method. This method implements the company billing policy of dividing the annual premium into twelve even payments with any leftover amount from rounding added to the December bill. You could create it as a final method like this:

```java
public final BigDecimal calculateMonthlyPayment(Month month) {
    BigDecimal annualPremium = calculateAnnualPremium();
    BigDecimal regularPayment =
        annualPremium.divide(new BigDecimal(12), RoundingMode.DOWN);
    if (month == Month.DECEMBER) {
        BigDecimal elevenPayments = regularPayment.multiply(new BigDecimal(11));
        return annualPremium.subtract(elevenPayments);
    } else {
        return regularPayment;
    }
}
```

By making this method final, you make sure that all insurance policies calculate the monthly payment consistently, and communicate to developers creating child classes that the starting point when calculating the cost of a policy is the `calculateAnnualPremium()` method. This prevents a misunderstanding like trying to begin by writing the `calculateMonthlyPayment()` method followed by a `calculateAnnualPremium()` method that multiplies that value by twelve.

---

# Protected access

When you learned about encapsulation, you learned about the `public` and `private` access modifiers. Properties and methods designated `public` are accessible from anywhere, while those designated `private` are only accessible within that class. When designing classes, and thinking about inheritance, the `protected` access modifier is a third option to consider.

## The `protected` access modifier

A property or method designated `protected` is accessible within the class like a `private` property or method and also within any descendants of that class.

Returning to the `InsurancePolicy` example, you might add a `coverageStartDate` property to the base class, since every kind of insurance policy has a date when its coverage begins. If you make that property `private`, though, the various child classes like `AutomotivePolicy` and `HomeownersPolicy` wouldn't have access to it. You could fix that by making it `public`, but then any class could access it, which violates the principle of encapsulation. So, you declare it `protected` like this:

```java
public abstract class InsurancePolicy {

    protected LocalDate coverageStartDate;

}
```

Now, `coverageStartDate` is available to any descendant of `InsurancePolicy`, but still encapsulated within the "family tree" which restricts other totally unrelated classes from using it.

---

# Package access

You've learned that you can make methods and properties available to all classes, no classes, and child classes. There's one more thing to know regarding access and packages.

In Java, classes grouped together in a package are typically related, even when there's no inheritance involved. Because of this, `protected` properties and methods are also accessible to classes in the same package.

Java also has a fourth type of access, sometimes called "default" or "package-private," that applies when you declare a property or method and don't specify any access modifier. Those properties and methods are only accessible within the same package, but not to classes outside the package, even if they're descendants. `protected` properties and methods are always accessible to descendants, regardless of what package they're in.

The following table summarizes where each of Java's access modifiers allows access:

| **Modifier**    | **Same Class?** | **Same Package?** | **Descendant?** | **Anywhere?** |
| --------------- | --------------- | ----------------- | --------------- | ------------- |
| public          | Yes             | Yes               | Yes             | Yes           |
| protected       | Yes             | Yes               | Yes             | No            |
| no modifier     | Yes             | Yes               | No              | No            |
| pivate          | Yes             | No                | No              | No            |

---

# Unit summary

In this unit, you learned:

-   How to require inheritance with abstract classes and abstract methods.
-   The differences and similarities between abstract classes and interfaces.
-   How to restrict inheritance with final classes and final methods.
-   How to control access to inherited properties and methods with the `protected` access modifier.

---

# Quiz

## **Managing Inheritance 1**

**You can't create instances of ______ classes.**

◉ abstract

○ final

○ protected

○ private

**Explanation:** To use an abstract class, you must inherit from it. You can then create instances of those child classes.


## **Managing Inheritance 2**

**True or False: Abstract methods must be overridden by a method in a concrete subclass.**

◉ True

○ False

**Explanation:** Whenever a concrete class inherits from an abstract class, it won't compile until it provides an implementation of all the abstract methods it has inherited.


## **Managing Inheritance 3**

**True or False: An abstract class may have method implementations inside of it.**

◉ True

○ False

**Explanation:** An abstract class can contain both abstract and non-abstract methods. Only the abstract method aren't implemented.


## **Managing Inheritance 4**

**What are some benefits of using an abstract class rather than an interface?**

	Select all correct options

■ You can avoid duplicating code in related classes

□ You can take advantage of polymorphism

■ You can provide protected methods to inherit

□ You can require implementation of certain methods

□ You can use completely unrelated classes together

**Explanation:** An abstract class provides a way to share code within a similarly structured set of classes, and it can include methods with any access modifier.


## **Managing Inheritance 5**

**True or False: You can declare a class both `abstract` and `final`.**

○ True

◉ False

**Explanation:** `abstract` and `final` are mutually exclusive since making use of an abstract class requires inheriting from it, and other classes can't inherit from a final class.


## **Managing Inheritance 6**

**In what way is your usage of a final method restricted?**

○ You can't call that method outside its class

○ You can only include that method in a final class

◉ You can't override that method in a subclass

○ You can only include that method in an abstract class

**Explanation:** A final method is a method that a child class can't override. The child class inherits the method as-is and can't provide a different implementation of it.


## **Managing Inheritance 7**

**If a method has the `protected` access modifier, where can you call it?**

	Select all correct options

■ within the same class

■ within a class in the same package

■ within a descendant class

□ within any other class

**Explanation:** A property or method designated `protected` is accessible within the class like a `private` property or method and also within any descendants of that class. `protected` properties and methods are also accessible to classes in the same package.


## **Managing Inheritance 8**

**If a method has no access modifier, where can you call it?**

	Select all correct options

■ within the same class

■ within a class in the same package

□ within a descendant class

□ within any other class

**Explanation:** The type of access that applies when you declare a property or method and don't specify any access modifier makes properties and methods accessible within the same class and other classes in the package, but not to classes outside the package, even if they're descendants.


## **Managing Inheritance 9**

**What's the main reason for using the `abstract` or `final` keywords on classes and methods?**

○ To provide more options for other developers when they inherit from classes you design

○ To improve performance at runtime in applications that use classes you design

○ To reduce the number of compiler errors that occur related to classes you design

◉ To help ensure other developers correctly and consistently use classes you design

**Explanation:** When you're designing a new class, you can require other classes to implement certain methods, prevent other classes from overriding certain methods, and control which properties and methods child classes can access. Doing those things is an important way to communicate with other developers and helps ensure they use your code correctly.
