# Requiring inheritance

## Abstract classes

An **abstract class** is a class that you can't create an instance of. To use an abstract class, you must inherit from it. In contrast, a regular class that you can create an instance of is sometimes referred to as a **concrete class**.

When would you want a class you can't create an instance of? One of the main benefits of inheritance is that when several classes have properties and methods in common, you can avoid repetition of those common features by putting them in a superclass. Often it doesn't make sense to ever create an instance of that superclass since it's too general to be useful on its own.

For example, an insurance company may offer automotive, homeowner's, and renter's policies. Each kind of policy would have an associated class to keep track of its unique features, but they would also have some properties and methods in common like a `policyHolder` property and an `addClaim()` method. An `InsurancePolicy` superclass would be a good place for those common features. For example:

```java
public class InsurancePolicy {
    private Person policyHolder;
    // other common properties...

    public void addClaim(Claim newClaim) {
        // ...
    }

    // Getters, setters, etc.
}
```

Then the various policy classes would all extend `InsurancePolicy` like this:

```java
public class AutomotivePolicy extends InsurancePolicy {
    private String vehicleIdentificationNumber;
    private int modelYear;
    private boolean hasAntiTheftSystem;
    // other properties specific to an AutomotivePolicy...

    // Getters, setters, etc.
}
```

As the designer of these classes, you'd want to make it clear to other developers that they need to create instances of specific child classes like `AutomotivePolicy`, rather than `InsurancePolicy`. To do this, you make `InsurancePolicy` an abstract class by adding the keyword `abstract` to the class declaration:

```java
public abstract class InsurancePolicy {
    private Person policyHolder;
    // other common properties...

    public void addClaim(Claim newClaim) {
        // ...
    }

    // Getters, setters, etc.
}
```

Now if someone tries to create an instance of an `InsurancePolicy`, they'll get a compiler error to let them know they're not using this class correctly.

>✔ Tip: Use abstract class variables for polymorphism
>
>Even though you can't create an instance of an abstract class, you can still declare a variable of that class, which allows polymorphism through inheritance.

## Abstract methods

An **abstract method** is a method with no implementation that's declared in an abstract class. Any concrete class that extends the abstract class must override the abstract method and provide an implementation for it.

Abstract methods are useful when an abstract class's children have some behavior in common, but the details of that behavior vary. For example, as the designer of the `InsurancePolicy` class, you might need to make sure that every type of insurance policy has a `calculateAnnualPremium()` method, while allowing different calculations for each type. You can accomplish that by declaring the method with the `abstract` keyword, like this:

```java
public abstract class InsurancePolicy {
    // ...

    public abstract BigDecimal calculateAnnualPremium();
    // Note that there is no method body.

    // ...
}
```

Now, any concrete class that inherits from `InsurancePolicy` must provide an implementation for that method. So if another developer later creates a new child class of `InsurancePolicy` to represent pet insurance or travel insurance, their code won't compile until they provide an appropriate `calculateAnnualPremium()` method in their new class.

## Abstract classes and interfaces

This idea of requiring a class to implement certain methods may sound familiar from when you learned previously about interfaces. So what's the difference?

-   A class can only inherit from one other class, but it can implement any number of interfaces.
-   An abstract class can provide implementations for some or all of its methods, while an interface normally doesn't provide any.
-   All of an interface's methods are public, while an abstract class can declare methods with any access modifier.

The implication of these differences is that an interface provides a lightweight way to use potentially unrelated classes together for a particular purpose, while an abstract class provides a way to share code within a similarly structured set of classes.

Abstract classes and interfaces aren't mutually exclusive, either. It's entirely possible for a class to both extend an abstract class and implement several interfaces.
