# Quiz

**Managing Inheritance 1**

You can't create instances of ______ classes.

◉ abstract

○ final

○ protected

○ private

**Explanation:** To use an abstract class, you must inherit from it. You can then create instances of those child classes.

---

**Managing Inheritance 2**

True or False: Abstract methods must be overridden by a method in a concrete subclass.

◉ True

○ False

**Explanation:** Whenever a concrete class inherits from an abstract class, it won't compile until it provides an implementation of all the abstract methods it has inherited.

---

**Managing Inheritance 3**

True or False: An abstract class may have method implementations inside of it.

◉ True

○ False

**Explanation:** An abstract class can contain both abstract and non-abstract methods. Only the abstract method aren't implemented.

---

**Managing Inheritance 4**

What are some benefits of using an abstract class rather than an interface?

	Select all correct options

■ You can avoid duplicating code in related classes

□ You can take advantage of polymorphism

■ You can provide protected methods to inherit

□ You can require implementation of certain methods

□ You can use completely unrelated classes together

**Explanation:** An abstract class provides a way to share code within a similarly structured set of classes, and it can include methods with any access modifier.

---

**Managing Inheritance 5**

True or False: You can declare a class both `abstract` and `final`.

○ True

◉ False

**Explanation:** `abstract` and `final` are mutually exclusive since making use of an abstract class requires inheriting from it, and other classes can't inherit from a final class.

---

**Managing Inheritance 6**

In what way is your usage of a final method restricted?

○ You can't call that method outside its class

○ You can only include that method in a final class

◉ You can't override that method in a subclass

○ You can only include that method in an abstract class

**Explanation:** A final method is a method that a child class can't override. The child class inherits the method as-is and can't provide a different implementation of it.

---

**Managing Inheritance 7**

If a method has the `protected` access modifier, where can you call it?

	Select all correct options

■ within the same class

■ within a class in the same package

■ within a descendant class

□ within any other class

**Explanation:** A property or method designated `protected` is accessible within the class like a `private` property or method and also within any descendants of that class. `protected` properties and methods are also accessible to classes in the same package.

---

**Managing Inheritance 8**

If a method has no access modifier, where can you call it?

	Select all correct options

■ within the same class

■ within a class in the same package

□ within a descendant class

□ within any other class

**Explanation:** The type of access that applies when you declare a property or method and don't specify any access modifier makes properties and methods accessible within the same class and other classes in the package, but not to classes outside the package, even if they're descendants.

---

**Managing Inheritance 9**

What's the main reason for using the `abstract` or `final` keywords on classes and methods?

○ To provide more options for other developers when they inherit from classes you design

○ To improve performance at runtime in applications that use classes you design

○ To reduce the number of compiler errors that occur related to classes you design

◉ To help ensure other developers correctly and consistently use classes you design

**Explanation:** When you're designing a new class, you can require other classes to implement certain methods, prevent other classes from overriding certain methods, and control which properties and methods child classes can access. Doing those things is an important way to communicate with other developers and helps ensure they use your code correctly.
