# Layouts in CSS

Layouts for HTML pages were once handled by the HTML side of web pages. At first, most of the layout was done using HTML tables and splitting the content up into different cells on the page.

Eventually, the trend moved toward handling layout by using `<div>`s and then positioning those `<div>`s properly on the page using float, alignment, and position. Then CSS libraries like [Bootstrap](https://getbootstrap.com/) came along to try and fix the layout issues in CSS. These became very popular and solved the issue as best they could.

But now there are better tools for handling layouts than ever before in CSS, supported by more and more browsers as they improve. The two main tools that you'll learn about are **Flexbox** and **Grid**. Both of these are rather new additions to CSS but are already adopted by all the major browsers.

The Flexible Box Module, or Flexbox, helps align and layout **_items_**. Flexbox is useful for any interface layout that needs to nicely organize a group of similar objects, like a Twitter feed, a list of products on Amazon, or a Pinterest board.

The CSS Grid Layout, or Grid, allows dividing a **_page_** into major regions and then assigning elements to those regions. This removes the need for floats, trying to align elements, or writing extra CSS and HTML to lay the elements out properly. It also makes responding to screen size changes—from desktop to phone to tablet—easier.

Using Flexbox and Grid together can build very complex and stable layouts very quickly. You'll look at Grid first, since that's mainly used for laying out entire pages, and then Flexbox, which can lay out sections of a page.