# Logical design

**Logical design** is the process of creating a design that adheres to the rules of the relational data model.

## Normalization

**Normalization** is a logical database design technique which organizes tables in a manner that reduces redundancy and dependency of data. It generally produces a number of smaller tables and links them using relationships.

E.F. Codd, author of the seminal _A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks_, created the theory of data placed in **normal forms** (NF). He originally devised three normal forms which have since grown to six or seven. A common goal of normalization in relational database design is to achieve **Third Normal Form** (3NF).

Each data item in a table is considered an atomic, standalone fact:

-   **First Normal Form** (1NF): For each entity, create a separate entity for repeating data groups. No fact may repeat in a table.
-   **Second Normal Form** (2NF): For each entity, create a separate entity for data elements that are based on a portion of the primary key. Each data item must be based on the entire primary key of the table.
-   **Third Normal Form** (3NF): For each entity, create a separate entity for data elements that are based on some other data element. Each data item must be based on only the primary key.

The normal forms are cumulative. You must be 1NF to be in 2NF, and you must be in 2NF to be in 3NF.

To determine if you're in 3NF, place a data item in a table and ask yourself two questions:

1.  **Is the fact or data element already in the table?** If the answer is no, you're in 1NF.
2.  **Is it a fact about the key, the whole key, and nothing but the key?** If the answer is yes, you're in 3NF. (The whole key checks 2NF; nothing but the key checks 3NF.)

If either of the questions results in the "wrong" answer, you must:

1.  Look for an existing table where the data item does fit, or
2.  Create a new table to hold the data item.

For example, if you were designing a database for a school, you might initially create a table in which each row represents a course and its students. Each record would have fields like:

-   course_id
-   course_name
-   student1_name
-   student1_status
-   student2_name
-   student2_status
-   student3_name
-   student3_status
-   and so on...

But repeating the data elements about students in each record means that this isn't 1NF. So, you'd move the data about students to a new table where each record represents one student.

As you continue designing the database for the school, you might set up a table to track grades on assignments, with each record having a composite primary key made up of an assignment id and a student id. As you add more data elements, you would make sure that they depend on the whole composite key. For example, adding a field for the grade received would be fine since each grade is for a specific combination of a student and assignment.

Adding a field for the name of the assignment would violate 2NF, however, because it only depends on the assignment id. It doesn't vary for each student. So, you'd find another table to hold that element—such as a table where each record represents an assignment.

When adding data elements about teachers to your design, the table with course data might be a good location. Each course has a teacher, so adding a teacher id to each record in that table makes sense.

However, if you then wanted to add the teacher's phone number, that would violate 3NF because the teacher's phone number depends on the teacher id rather than on the primary key of the table (the course id). So, you'd add the phone number to a table where the teacher id is the primary key.

>**🛈 Note: Creating new tables**
>
>When you create the new table, you must also follow the subsequent steps in the process—designating primary keys and establishing relationships—before continuing to another data item.

## Verifying integrity

You must apply integrity rules to verify the validity of your design. There are various types of integrity rules.

**Entity Integrity Rule**: The primary key can't contain NULL. It must uniquely identify the row. For a composite key made up of several columns, none of the columns can contain NULL. Most of the RDBMSs check and enforce this rule.

**Referential Integrity Rule**: Each foreign key value must be matched to an entire primary key value in the table referenced (parent table).

You can insert a row with a foreign key in the dependent table only if the value exists in the parent table. If the value of the primary key changes in the parent table—meaning that the primary key value is updated or row is deleted—all rows with the matching foreign key in the dependent tables must be considered or handled accordingly. Your options include:

1.  Disallow the change to the primary key. This is most common.
    
2.  Cascade the change to the primary key by changing all the matching foreign keys in all dependents.
    
3.  Delete the matching dependent rows.
    
4.  Set the foreign key value in the matching dependent rows to NULL. This can be done only if the foreign key isn't part of the primary key of the dependent table. See Entity Integrity Rule.
    

Most RDBMSs can be set up to perform the check and ensure the referential integrity in the specified manner.

**Business Logic Integrity**: There could be integrity validation pertaining to the business logic. Some examples include:

-   Zip code must be five digits within a certain range
    
-   Delivery date and time must fall within business hours
    
-   Quantity ordered must be equal or less than quantity in stock
    

These could be handled in RDBMS-managed validation rules for the specific column or programming logic.