# Physical implementation

**Physical implementation** is the stage of the design process where you'll translate your design from a drawing on paper or a whiteboard to actual code. You'll write a SQL script to implement your design using a subset of the language called **Data Definition Language** or **DDL**.

The most important DDL statements to be familiar with are `CREATE TABLE`, `DROP TABLE`, and `ALTER TABLE`.

## CREATE TABLE

The `CREATE TABLE` statement adds new tables to a database.

The first thing to include in a `CREATE TABLE` statement is the name of the new table. For example, if you were setting up a table to hold data about cities, you would start with:

```sql
CREATE TABLE city ();
```

Next, in the parentheses following the table name, you'll add a list of fields, specifying the name and data type for each. For the data types that require parameters, put those in parentheses following the type. For the table of cities, that might look like this:

```sql
CREATE TABLE city (
    city_id serial, --This is a PostgreSQL specific data type for auto-incrementing ints
    city_name varchar(50),
    population int,
    area numeric(5,1)
);
```

Finally, add constraints. A constraint that applies to a single field—like `NOT NULL`—is often specified immediately after the data type:

```sql
CREATE TABLE city (
    city_id serial,
    city_name varchar(50) NOT NULL,
    population int NOT NULL,
    area numeric(5,1) NOT NULL
);
```

Constraints can also be added separately to the list of fields. For example, you can add the `PRIMARY KEY` constraint—which includes the `NOT NULL` and `UNIQUE` constraints—like this:

```sql
CREATE TABLE city (
    city_id serial,
    city_name varchar(50) NOT NULL,
    population int NOT NULL,
    area numeric(5,1) NOT NULL,
    CONSTRAINT PK_city PRIMARY KEY(city_id)
);
```

>**🛈 Note: Constraint names**
>
>Constraints can be named, which makes them easier to refer to. A common naming convention is to use a prefix that indicates the type of constraint followed by the names of the tables or fields affected by the constraint. For example:
>
>-   `PK_customer` would be a `PRIMARY KEY` constraint on the `customer` table.
>-   `FK_invoice_customer` would be a `FOREIGN KEY` constraint on the `invoice` table that relates it to the `customer` table.
>-   `UQ_name` would be a `UNIQUE` constraint on the `name` field.

## DROP TABLE

The `DROP TABLE` statement deletes a table, and all the data it contains, from the database.

When writing a SQL script that includes `CREATE TABLE` statements, it's convenient to include `DROP TABLE` statements at the beginning so the script can be re-run to reset the database. Without the `DROP TABLE` statements first, the `CREATE TABLE` statements would cause errors since you can't create a table that already exists.

Start by specifying the name of the table to you want to delete. For example, to remove a table named `product`, you'd do this:

```sql
DROP TABLE product;
```

`DROP TABLE` causes an error if the specified table doesn't exist. To avoid that error, add `IF EXISTS` like this:

```sql
DROP TABLE IF EXISTS product;
```

When executing `DROP TABLE` statements, the database must maintain referential integrity. This means an error occurs if you attempt to drop a table that's referenced by foreign keys. To eliminate the table along with all the foreign key constraints that reference it, add the `CASCADE` keyword after the table name:

```sql
DROP TABLE IF EXISTS product CASCADE;
```

## ALTER TABLE

The `ALTER TABLE` statement makes changes to an existing table. It can add or remove individual fields and constraints.

When writing a SQL script to implement a database design, it's sometimes necessary to add certain constraints after another table has been created or data has been inserted into tables. In those situations, rather than adding the constraints as part of the `CREATE TABLE` statement, you'll add them with an `ALTER TABLE`.

Most constraints are added using the same syntax they have in a `CREATE TABLE` statement. For example, if you had an `assignment` table that included a student id from the `student` table, you'd add the foreign key constraint like this:

```sql
ALTER TABLE assignment ADD CONSTRAINT FK_assignment_student FOREIGN KEY(student_id) REFERENCES student(student_id);
```

PostgreSQL handles `NOT NULL` constraints differently than other constraints. You add a `NOT NULL` constraint with `ALTER TABLE` like this:

```sql
ALTER TABLE assignment ALTER COLUMN student_id SET NOT NULL;
```

>**✔ Tip: Refer to an existing file**
>
>Since DDL isn't something most developers use on a regular basis, it's helpful to refer to an existing DDL file to remember the exact syntax when you are writing the SQL script for your database design. For example, you could refer to the files used to create the databases you've been using in prior units.