# File input and output

When using a programming language, there are times when you have to work with files on the hard drive, both reading from them and writing to them. In fact, you may do this many times while on the job.

Data is transferred through text files more often than you'd think. Knowing how to read and write files is an important skill to learn.

---

# Reading files

Every language has classes for opening and reading files in its standard library. Working with files follows a very common pattern.

In Java, the class that you use to read files is the `Scanner` class. Given the location of a file, the `Scanner` class can open the file and read from it, either character by character, line by line, or all at once.

To understand how your code reads files, you'll need to understand the concept of data streams.

## Data streams

In computer science, a **stream** is a data structure that reads data as a series of ordered bytes. You mainly work with text data streams, so each byte represents a character in a large string.

You can think of a stream like an assembly line. You don't have to process everything at once. Instead, you work piece by piece as the items move down the line. Your data works the same way. You can have it delivered character by character or line by line instead of dealing with the entire file at once.

The characters can come from anywhere—from a user typing on a keyboard, a network connection to a file on the internet, or a file on the hard drive of your computer. You've already worked with data streams when you read input from a user. Now you can work with files in the same fashion.

By using a stream and only reading in a small part of a file at a time, you can work with many different sizes of files. Some files can be multiple gigabytes in size or even larger.

## Opening a file stream

Opening a file for reading requires that you know the path to the file that you want to read.

Many programs ask the user what file they want to read in. This gets the **file path**, or the location on the hard drive to find the file. Once you obtain the file path, you can open that file and read from it.

After you have the file path, you can use that to create a new `File` object:

```java
File dataFile = new File(filePath);
```

You can use the `java.io.File` class to create objects that represent a file on the file system. Using this class, you can check if the file already exists by using the `exists()` method, or see if you have permission to access the file with `canWrite()` or `canRead()`.

Keep in mind that this doesn't open the file. It only gives you a reference to it in Java. To open the file, pass the `File` object to a new `Scanner`:

```java
Scanner dataInput = new Scanner(dataFile);
```

The `Scanner` then opens the file and prepares the data stream of the file's contents, ready for you to read.

## Reading text from a file

You can read text from a `Scanner` using a file like you did when using user input. Usually, you want to read the file line by line to process it. You can do that by calling the `nextLine()` method in a while loop:

```java
while (dataInput.hasNextLine()) {
    String lineOfInput = dataInput.nextLine();
    ...
}
```

This assigns the first line of the file, not including the return character at the end, to the `lineOfInput` variable. This allows you to work with that line as you would any other string. Then, it gives you the next line and continues. Once it reaches the end of the file, `hasNextLine()` returns `false`, and the while loop ends.

---

# Error handling with file I/O

When working with external resources, errors are bound to happen at some point. When reading a file, there's a chance that the file isn't there, or it could be deleted halfway through reading it. Because of that, you need to be able to handle a `FileNotFoundException`.

There's another issue with this line of code you saw earlier:

```
Scanner dataInput = new Scanner(dataFile);
```

The `Scanner` opens the file for reading, but nothing closes the file. The file might close when the program ends, but opening a file can put a lock on it, preventing other applications from working with the file. You want to make sure you only have the file open for as long as you need it and no longer than that.

You can handle both of these issues with a new kind of `try` block: the `try-with-resources` block:

```java
try (Scanner dataInput = new Scanner(dataFile)) {
    while(dataInput.hasNextLine()) {
        String lineOfInput = dataInput.nextLine();
        ...
    }
} catch (FileNotFoundException e) {
    System.err.println("The file does not exist.");
}
```

Because you're passing the `Scanner` creation to the `try` block, this both closes the file once the `try` block completes and catches a `FileNotFoundException` if something happens with the file while reading it. Always use this style of code whenever you open a file for reading or writing.

---

# Unit summary

In this unit, you learned:

-   How to open an existing file and read its contents line-by-line.
-   How to handle errors while doing file I/O.

---

# Quiz

## **File I/O Reading 1**

**Which of the following classes represents a file path and can be used to check whether the path exists, if it's a file or directory, get directory contents, and other file system operations?**

◉ `java.io.File`

○ `java.io.FileInputStream`

○ `java.io.FileReader`

○ `java.io.FileWriter`

**Explanation:** `File` is a representation of file and directory pathnames.


## v**File I/O Reading 2**

**`FileNotFoundException` extends `IOException` which extends `Exception` which extends `Throwable`. The `getMessage()` method of `Throwable` can be called on a `FileNotFoundException` object. This is an example of what OOP principle?**

○ Encapsulation

◉ Inheritance

○ Polymorphism

○ Cohesion

**Explanation:** A subclass can "inherit" methods from its superclasses.


## **File I/O Reading 3**

**What does the following code do?**

```java
File dataFile = new File("myFile.txt");
```

○ Creates a new text file called "myFile.txt" on the user's disk

○ Opens the file "myFile.txt" from disk for reading into the program

◉ Creates a Java `File` object which references the path "myFile.txt"

○ Checks whether the file "myFile.txt" exists on the user's disk

**Explanation:** This statement creates a Java object and assigns it to the variable `dataFile`. It doesn't do anything in the file system.


## **File I/O Reading 4**

**What does the `hasNextLine()` method of a `Scanner` return if there are no more lines to be read from the file?**

◉ `false`

○ `0`

○ `null`

○ `""` (empty string)

○ `true`

**Explanation:** `hasNextLine()` returns a boolean value: `true` if there are more lines, `false` if not.


## **File I/O Reading 5**

**What does the following code do?**

```java
File dataFile = new File("myFile.txt");
Scanner dataInput = new Scanner(dataFile);
while (dataInput.hasNextLine()) {
    String lineOfInput = dataInput.nextLine();
    System.out.println(lineOfInput);
}
```

	Select all correct options

■ Opens a file called "myFile.txt" from disk

□ Creates the file "myFile.txt" if it doesn't exist

□ Tells the user if the file "myFile.txt" doesn't exist

■ Reads all lines from the file

■ Prints each line to the user's terminal window

□ Closes and unlocks the file

**Explanation:** This code opens a file (if it's there), reads in each line, and writes each line to `stdout`.


## **File I/O Reading 6**

**What does the following code do?**

```java
File dataFile = new File("myFile.txt");
try (Scanner dataInput = new Scanner(dataFile)) {
    while(dataInput.hasNextLine()) {
        String lineOfInput = dataInput.nextLine();
        System.out.println(lineOfInput);
    }
} catch (FileNotFoundException e) {
    System.err.println("The file does not exist.");
}
```

	Select all correct options

■ Opens a file called "myFile.txt" from disk

□ Creates the file "myFile.txt" if it doesn't exist

■ Tells the user if the file "myFile.txt" doesn't exist

■ Reads all lines from the file

■ Prints each line to the user's terminal window

■ Closes and unlocks the file

**Explanation:** This code opens a file if it's there, informs the user if it's not there, reads in each line, writes each line to `stdout`, and then closes the file to free the file system resource.


## **File I/O Reading 7**

**Inspect the following code:**

```java
// Create a Scanner using the InputStream "System.in"
Scanner input = new Scanner(System.in);
System.out.print("Enter a path to the file: ");  // prompt the user
String filePath = input.nextLine(); // Save the user input to a variable
File dataFile = new File(filePath); // Create a File object referencing the path

// Create a Scanner using the File "dataFile"
try (Scanner dataInput = new Scanner(dataFile)) {
    // Loop, read and print out the file line-by-line
    while (dataInput.hasNextLine()) {
        String lineOfInput = dataInput.nextLine();
        System.out.println(lineOfInput);
    }
} catch (FileNotFoundException e) {
    System.err.println("The file does not exist.");
}
```

**This code creates two `Scanner` objects - one to read input from the terminal, and one to read a file. You can do this because the Scanner class defines multiple constructors: one constructor accepts an `InputStream` (System.in, the user's terminal), and another constructor accepts a `File` object.**

**This is an example of using:**

○ Inheritance

○ Polymorphism

○ Operator overloading

◉ Method overloading

○ Method overriding

**Explanation:** A constructor is a method, and overloading the method means creating multiple implementations, each of which accepts a different set of arguments.
