# Exception object

Java provides an _exception_ object with the details about the exception that was thrown. This object is an instance of the `Exception` class, or one of its many subclasses. The details of the exception can be accessed using the object's methods.

## Info: Exceptions built on the principle of inheritance

```
Object
    Throwable
        Exception
            RuntimeException
                IllegalArgumentException
                NumberFormatException
                ArithmeticException
                NullPointerException
                IndexOutOfBoundsException
                ...
```

The number of built-in exception classes is far too many to show here. This is just a sample. The Oracle JavaDocs has the full `RuntimeException` hierarchy available. Look under the list of direct known subclasses, [`RuntimeException:Exception` subclass](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/RuntimeException.html)

Using the example from the previous section, you'll catch a `NumberFormatException`, which is thrown when a call to one of the `parse` methods can't complete:

```java
try {
    System.out.print("Enter a number: ");
    String s = input.nextLine();
    int result = Integer.parseInt(s);

    System.out.println("The number typed in is " + result + ".");
} catch (NumberFormatException e) {
    System.out.println("An error parsing the input.");
}

System.out.println("Thank you.");
```

**Example with valid input**

```
Enter a number: 2
The number type in is 2.
Thank you.
```

**Example with invalid input**

```
Enter a number: two
An error occurred parsing the input.
Thank you.
```

You can configure the `catch` block to look for a specific type of exception. It catches anything that's of type `NumberFormatException` or inherits from `NumberFormatException`.

Notice this looks like a method call with a parameter that represents the object that contains the detail about the exception that occurred.

In sum, you should catch exceptions when you understand how you want to recover from it.

## Exception properties

The [Exception](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/Exception.html) class is the base class from which all exceptions inherit. It contains the following properties to help you understand how exceptions work:

| Property Name | Description                                                                          |
| ------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Cause         | Used to create and preserve a series of exceptions caught during exception handling. |
| Message       | Provides detail about the cause of the exception.                                    |
| StackTrace    | Contains a stack trace that can determine where the error occurred.                  |

Each of the properties are accessible with their corresponding getters—`getCause()`, `getMessage()`, and `getStackTrace()`.

Most of the classes that inherit from `Exception` don't add additional properties or methods. They inherit from `Exception` to allow as specific of error handling as possible.

The next section looks at two particular properties to demonstrate their usefulness.

### Message

The `Message` property describes the exception in further detail:

-   Most exception messages explain _the reason for the exception_. They aren't guaranteed to be user-friendly.
-   With custom exceptions, you can set your own message.

### Stack trace

A stack trace is a list of method calls the application had pending when the exception occurred. Having a stack trace is extremely important. You don't want to troubleshoot production issues without seeing the original error take place.

If you look at a sample Java stack trace, you can see its value:

```
Exception in thread "main" java.lang.NullPointerException
        at com.example.myproject.Book.getTitle(Book.java:16)
        at com.example.myproject.Author.getBookTitles(Author.java:25)
        at com.example.myproject.Bootstrap.main(Bootstrap.java:14)
```

The stack trace acts like a trail of breadcrumbs so that you can determine where the `NullPointerException` occurred in your code. If you start with the first line beginning with "at", you'll see the name of the class, method, and the line number that caused the `NullPointerException`.

In this case it's this line:

```
at com.example.myproject.Book.getTitle(Book.java:16)
```

You use this by observing what file it references and look directly at the line. In this case, the error occurred in `Book.java` on line 16:

```java
15   public String getTitle() {
16      System.out.println(title.toLower());
17      return title;
18   }
```

A `NullPointerException` occurs when you try to invoke a property or method on an object whose value is null. It looks like `title` may have been null.

### Danger: Stack traces give a lot away

Stack traces can be dangerous if observed by customers or users in production. You should use error screens to show when something goes wrong. If a malicious user saw a stack trace, they'd have information that can compromise your application, like the technology used, the libraries your code relies on, and internal naming conventions.

In sum: read the stack trace. It'll save you time.