# Set

Another unordered data structure is `Set`, a collection that holds unique values. It allows you to quickly determine if the value already exists in the set.

Because `Set`s are unordered, they don't maintain indexes. Items in a `Set` are identified by **hashcodes**. A hashcode is a specially computed value which uniquely identifies each item in the `Set`.

## Creating a new set
Add the required imports to your code:

```java
import java.util.Set;
import java.util.HashSet;
```

The syntax for creating a set is `Set<T> identifier = new HashSet<T>()`. So if you want to create a `Set` of `String`s, you'd write:

```java
Set<String> names = new HashSet<String>();
```

Like with other collection classes, the type can be any reference data type you want. Here, you create a `Set` that holds `Boolean`s, and another one that holds `Employee`s.

```java
Set<Boolean> schedule = new HashSet<Boolean>();
Set<Employee> reviews = new HashSet<Employee>();
```

## Adding items to the set
The `add()` method adds an element to the `Set`:

```java
Set<String> characters = new HashSet<String>();

characters.add("Luke");    // contains Luke
characters.add("Rey");     // contains Luke, Rey
characters.add("Ben");     // contains Luke, Rey, Ben
characters.add("Luke");    // contains Luke, Rey, Ben
```

The `add()` method returns a `boolean` indicating if the element was added to the `Set`. `false` indicates the element is already present and wasn't re-added.

## Removing items from the set
The `remove()` method removes an element from a `Set`. The method returns a `boolean` indicating if the element was removed:

```java
Set<String> characters = new HashSet<String>();

// ... set contains Luke, Rey, and Ben

characters.remove("Ben");   // set now contains Luke and Rey
```

## Iterating through a set
`Sets` don't have indexes to access each item. To see each of the elements in a `Set`, you'll need to use the foreach loop:

```java
Set<String> characters = new HashSet<String>();

// ... set contains Luke, Rey, and Ben

for (String character : characters) {
    // execute code for each item in the set
}
```

## Other methods
This lesson covered the key methods of `Set`s, but it's important to know that there are many other methods that exist to make your job easier. Explore and experiment with the IntelliSense to see what other methods you can discover.

For more information, see the Java documentation for the [Set interface](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/Set.html) and the [HashSet class](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/HashSet.html) .