# What's unit testing?

Unit testing is a level of software testing where individual components, or units, of an application are tested. The purpose is to validate that each unit of the software performs as designed. A unit is the smallest testable part of any software. In object-oriented languages such as Java, each method of a class can be considered a testable unit.

Unit tests are pieces of code that run and execute your code to make sure that it's doing what it's supposed to do. Because unit tests are themselves software, the testing process is automated, and becomes part of the full development cycle.

Think about building a car. Cars consist of hundreds of separate components, but for this example, limit them to ball bearings, brakes, and wheels. Your unit tests for the ball bearings might test that they can handle a billion rotations. Your unit tests for the brakes might test the vehicle's stability under breaking in slippery conditions, while those for wheels might evaluate the impact performance of a wheel. Each component of the car is tested.

In sum, unit tests have the following characteristics:

-   They're always automated.
-   They isolate each part of the program to show that individual parts are correct.
-   They help detect problems early.
-   They force developers to think through inputs, outputs, and error conditions.

---

# Why do unit testing?

Now you know what unit testing is. The next question to answer is: why do developers need to do unit testing?

According to the book **_Working Effectively with Legacy Code_** by Michael Feathers, you can make software changes in two ways: edit and pray, or cover and modify.

## Edit and pray

Developers who **edit and pray** don't know if the changes they make impact code elsewhere. Essentially, they make their changes, ensure those changes work as planned, and hope that the changes didn't break anything somewhere else. However, software can grow to be hundreds or thousands of files. Changing a method might have consequences. If you're not writing unit tests, then you're using the edit and pray method.

## Cover and modify

**Cover and modify** means that you have unit test coverage of the way your code is expected to work. If you change a method, and suddenly a unit test fails that you didn't write, that might mean that someone else is depending on that method, too. Now, the code is broken. However, finding the bug is less costly to fix than depending on Quality Analysts to help you.

>**🛈 Note: What are quality analysts?**
>
>Quality Analysts are responsible for other types of testing.

When you cover and modify, you cover your bases by writing good unit tests and then modify freely, confident that you didn't introduce any new bugs. In other words, you want to make sure that each section of your code behaves the way that you expect it to for valid data and when there are no errors.

It's also important to make sure that there are no unintended consequences of the changes you make, and that the behavior of the code is consistent with the code's expectations.

Unit tests have a number of benefits. They force you to follow best practices, consider edge cases, and have clean, modularized code. You don't want to have a 1000-line program that only consists of one main method that does everything. It's only functionally correct.

>**🛈 Note: What are edge cases?**
>
>Edge cases are the very edge of a range. Imagine a method that returns a letter grade for a given score. If you've ever been in school, you know that a 90 is just enough to get an A, but an 89.9 is not. That's an edge case.

In sum, unit tests do the following:

-   They catch defects earlier in the development cycle when they're less costly to fix.
-   They detect changes that may break a design contract.
-   They clearly define what each unit does.
-   They can be used in a bottom up testing style, which makes integration testing easier. Integration testing is discussed in later lessons.

---

# Other types of testing

There are several types of testing, and at times the variety can feel overwhelming. Typically, testing is divided among different team members depending on the test type. For example, some types of testing is done by Quality Assurance (QA), while others might be performed by the product owner.

**Quality Assurance** is an umbrella term to encompass testing that's done outside of development. QA analysts generally don't write the code for an application.

Instead, they try to mimic what a user would do with the application or website—good or bad—either manually or by writing testing code. For instance, they might enter a mix of correct and incorrect data, like typing "one" if asked to enter an integer. That's the sign of a good QA analyst.

>**🛈 Note: Manual versus automated testing**
>
>-   **Manual testing** is done by a person interacting with a program, looking for problems. Manual tests are time consuming, but they allow for more creativity in the search for bugs, and they can evaluate subjective qualities of a program like ease of use.
>-   **Automated testing** is done by running testing code that either simulates user interactions with the program being tested or directly calls the methods of the program being tested. Automated tests are faster and less expensive to run than manual tests, and give more accurate and consistent results.

The following chart shows some common types of testing. Note that the "Who Does It" column indicates who **_usually_** does it. Being a developer doesn't mean that you shouldn't do exploratory or regression testing on your own code. Knowing how to do these tests is an important skill to have as a developer.

| **Type of Testing** | **Who Does It**                         | **Description**                                                                                                    |
| ------------------- | --------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Unit                | Developer                               | This is a test in the code. It tests a small piece of the code                                                    |
| Integration         | Developer                               | This is a test in th code. It tests code that interacts with an external system or resource (like a database).     |
| Exploratory         | QA                                      | Not following any kind of script. Looking for missing features or room for improvement. Allows for creativity. |
| Regression          | QA                                      | Validating that existing features still work. Can be automated or manual.                                          |
| Acceptance          | User of the system or Product Owner     | Validating that the software meets the needs of users.                                                            |

There are other types of testing as well:

-   Performance and scalability
-   Security
-   Usability
-   Accessibility
-   Portability and compatibility

All types of testing increase the likelihood of releasing working software that the end user wants. You're focusing on unit tests right now because they're earliest in the development cycle and find defects when they're less costly to fix.

---

# What makes a good unit test?

Good unit tests have the following characteristics:

-   Fast: elapsed time of running a unit test should be measured in milliseconds.
-   Reliable and repeatable: if a test passed or failed once, it should pass or fail again, assuming no code changes.
-   Independent: a test can run independently of other tests, and tests don't interact with one another.
-   Obvious: when a test fails, it's clear why it failed.

## What to test

It's always best to test what makes sense. You don't need to write unit tests to make sure that your getters and setters work.

Instead, test your logic. There are many tools you can use to test your code coverage. However, you want to make sure that all of your logic is tested, too. For example, you'd want to test a method that returns a letter grade for a given score.

Unit tests must check happy paths, error conditions, and edge cases. In the previous example, you might be tempted to say, "test every single score." Instead, you should test both edge cases for each grade, negatives, and nulls.

## What does a unit test look like?

When discussing unit tests, you may hear others mention the three **_A_**'s:

-   **Arrange**: begin by arranging the conditions of the test, such as setting up test data.
-   **Act**: perform the action of interest—meaning, the thing you're testing.
-   **Assert**: validate that the expected outcome occurred by means of an assertion—that is, a certain value was returned, or a file exists.

You'll learn more about the three **_A_**'s in the next lesson.

---

# Creating unit tests

Now, you'll write some unit tests. In this course, you'll use a testing framework called **JUnit** to create and run unit tests.

## Adding files and tests

Like all other Java code, unit testing code is defined within a class. Each test class typically contains the unit tests for a single class that's being tested.

The convention is that the test class belongs to the same package as the class under test. The name of the test class is the same name of the class it's testing with "Test" at the end. For example, for the class `Foo`, the test class would be `FooTest`.

JUnit includes three main annotations for methods to indicate that they're used in testing:

| **Annotation** | **Description**                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| -------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| @Test          | Indicates the method is a test method. Test methods are always `public`, return `void`, and take no arguments.                                                                                                               |
| @Before        | Indicates that the method runs prior to every test. It's used when there's a repetitive setup task that's performed by several tests—for example, the "Arrange" part of tests.                                             |
| @After         | Indicates that the method runs immediately after every test. It's used when there's a repetitive cleanup task that's performed by several tests—for example, deleting temp files or rolling back database transactions.     |

## Viewing tests

You can view tests in the **Run** window of IntelliJ. It opens automatically once you've run a test.

## Running tests

You can run the tests in a file by right-clicking on the file in project view or in the code editor, and selecting **Run 'FooTest'**, where "FooTest" is the name of your class.

You can run one test by right-clicking inside a test method in the code editor, and selecting the option **Run 'method_test()'**, where "method_test" is the name of your test method.

There are also **Run** buttons on the toolbar and along side the code editor, and you can use them to run tests in IntelliJ.

Once you've run tests, you can run tests again from the **Run** window using either the **Rerun 'FooTest'** or **Rerun Failed Tests** buttons.

## Debugging tests

You can debug a unit test by inserting a breakpoint, then right-clicking in the code editor and selecting **Debug 'FooTest'** or **Debug 'method_test()'**. Another way is to click the **Debug** button on the toolbar, or selecting **Debug 'FooTest'** when right-clicking on a file in the **Project** window.

>**🛈 Warning: Watch out for errors in tests**
>
>One common issue that can cause confusion is when a test doesn't pass due to an error **_in the test_**.
>
>When there is an error in a test, such as a null pointer exception, the test doesn't pass, but this doesn't mean there's a problem with the method being tested.
>
>When a test doesn't pass, use the debugger. It can help you determine if the problem is with the test you've written or if the test is failing "legitimately" because the code being tested isn't doing what the unit test expects it to do.

## Example test method

An example of a JUnit test looks like this. Notice the **Arrange-Act-Assert** pattern:

```java
@Test
public void length_returns_the_number_of_characters_in_a_String() {

    // Arrange
    String theString = "Java";

    // Act
    int length = theString.length();

    // Assert
    Assert.assertEquals(4, length);

    /* The assertEquals method validates that two values are equal
        * and fails the test if they are not equal */
}
```

---

# Unit summary

In this unit, you've learned:

-   What unit testing is
-   Why unit testing is important
-   Other types of testing, who performs them, and how they differ from unit testing
-   What makes a good unit test
-   How to run and view results from unit tests in the IDE

---

# Quiz

## **Unit Testing 1**

**Which of the following is an advantage of manual tests compared to automated tests?**

○ Test execution is faster

○ More consistent test results

○ Less expensive to run

◉ Can give qualitative results

**Explanation:** Since manual tests are performed by a person interacting with a program like an end user would, they're slower and more costly. However, they can provide feedback about subjective qualities of a program, like usability.


## **Unit Testing 2**

**Which of the following statements are true of **unit tests**?**

	Select all correct options

□ They're typically run by the product owner.

■ They isolate each part of the program to show that individual parts are correct.

□ They mimic human interactions with the program's user interface.

■ They're always automated tests.

□ They're primarily used at the end of development, immediately prior to release.

**Explanation:** Unit tests are always automated and focus one one method at a time, rather than interacting with the whole program the way a user would. Developers typically run them throughout the development process.


## **Unit Testing 3**

**True or False: You need to write a unit test for every getter and setter method to make sure they all work as expected.**

○ True

◉ False

**Explanation:** While there's no need to test every basic getter and setter, a unit test would be a good idea if the method had significant logic involved, like in the case of a getter for a complex derived property.


## **Unit Testing 4**

**In what order should a unit test perform the following steps:**

▤ Arrange

▤ Act

▤ Assert

**Explanation:** This is the standard pattern for unit tests. You may also see it referred to as Given-When-Then.


## **Unit Testing 5**

**You're testing a `Calculator` class that has an `add()` method that takes two `int`s and returns the result of adding them together. Assuming the `add()` method works correctly, what happens when you run the following test?**

```java
@Test
public void add_returns_the_correct_sum() {
    Calculator calculator = null;

    int result = calculator.add(2, 3);

    Assert.assertEquals(5, result);
}
```

○ The test passes

◉ The test doesn't pass

○ The test won't run because it's not a valid JUnit test

**Explanation:** Even though there's no problem with the method being tested, the test doesn't pass because a `NullPointerException` occurs when the test tries to call `calculator.add(2, 3)` since `calculator` is null.


## **Unit Testing 6**

**Now you're testing a `subtract()` method that takes two `int`s and returns the result of subtracting the first value from the second value. Assuming the `subtract()` method works correctly, what happens when you run the following test?**

```java
@Test
public void subtract_returns_the_correct_difference() {
    Calculator calculator = new Calculator();

    int result = calculator.subtract(9, 10);

    Assert.assertEquals(1, result);
}
```

◉ The test passes

○ The test doesn't pass

○ The test won't run because it's not a valid JUnit test

**Explanation:** This test is valid, runs without errors, and the method being tested returns the expected result.


## **Unit Testing 7**

**You're writing unit tests for a method called `findMatchingNames()` that takes a single `char` parameter and returns a list of names that begin with that character. The parameter is normally expected to be in the range A-Z. Which of the following parameter values should you be sure to include tests for?**

	Select all correct options

■ A and Z

□ All the characters between A and Z

■ A character outside the A-Z range

□ null

**Explanation:** It's important to include tests for the edge cases of A and Z and the error condition of a character outside the A-Z range.


## **Unit Testing 8**

**When you run the tests in this class, how many failing tests does JUnit report?**

```java
public class DemoTest {

    @Test
    public void this_test_passes() {
        Assert.assertTrue(true);
    }

    public void this_test_fails() {
        Assert.assertTrue(false);
    }

    public void this_test_also_passes() {
        Assert.assertTrue(true);
    }
}
```

**Answer:** 0

**Explanation:** JUnit reports zero failing tests, since only one method is marked with the `@Test` annotation and it passes.

## **Unit Testing 9**

**You're writing unit tests and notice that the "arrange" step is the same for all of them. So, you factor out the common code and put it into a separate method within the test class. What annotation should that new method have?**

**Answer:** `@Before`

**Explanation:** A method with the `@Before` annotation runs before each test method.
