# Other types of testing

There are several types of testing, and at times the variety can feel overwhelming. Typically, testing is divided among different team members depending on the test type. For example, some types of testing is done by Quality Assurance (QA), while others might be performed by the product owner.

**Quality Assurance** is an umbrella term to encompass testing that's done outside of development. QA analysts generally don't write the code for an application.

Instead, they try to mimic what a user would do with the application or website—good or bad—either manually or by writing testing code. For instance, they might enter a mix of correct and incorrect data, like typing "one" if asked to enter an integer. That's the sign of a good QA analyst.

>🛈 Note: Manual versus automated testing
>
>-   **Manual testing** is done by a person interacting with a program, looking for problems. Manual tests are time consuming, but they allow for more creativity in the search for bugs, and they can evaluate subjective qualities of a program like ease of use.
>-   **Automated testing** is done by running testing code that either simulates user interactions with the program being tested or directly calls the methods of the program being tested. Automated tests are faster and less expensive to run than manual tests, and give more accurate and consistent results.

The following chart shows some common types of testing. Note that the "Who Does It" column indicates who **_usually_** does it. Being a developer doesn't mean that you shouldn't do exploratory or regression testing on your own code. Knowing how to do these tests is an important skill to have as a developer.

| **Type of Testing** | **Who Does It**                         | **Description**                                                                                                    |
| ------------------- | --------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Unit                | Developer                               | This is a test in the code. It tests a small piece of the code                                                    |
| Integration         | Developer                               | This is a test in th code. It tests code that interacts with an external system or resource (like a database).     |
| Exploratory         | QA                                      | Not following any kind of script. Looking for missing features or room for improvement. Allows for creativity. |
| Regression          | QA                                      | Validating that existing features still work. Can be automated or manual.                                          |
| Acceptance          | User of the system or Product Owner     | Validating that the software meets the needs of users.                                                            |

There are other types of testing as well:

-   Performance and scalability
-   Security
-   Usability
-   Accessibility
-   Portability and compatibility

All types of testing increase the likelihood of releasing working software that the end user wants. You're focusing on unit tests right now because they're earliest in the development cycle and find defects when they're less costly to fix.
