# Creating unit tests

Now, you'll write some unit tests. In this course, you'll use a testing framework called **JUnit** to create and run unit tests.

## Adding files and tests

Like all other Java code, unit testing code is defined within a class. Each test class typically contains the unit tests for a single class that's being tested.

The convention is that the test class belongs to the same package as the class under test. The name of the test class is the same name of the class it's testing with "Test" at the end. For example, for the class `Foo`, the test class would be `FooTest`.

JUnit includes three main annotations for methods to indicate that they're used in testing:

| **Annotation** | **Description**                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| -------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| @Test          | Indicates the method is a test method. Test methods are always `public`, return `void`, and take no arguments.                                                                                                               |
| @Before        | Indicates that the method runs prior to every test. It's used when there's a repetitive setup task that's performed by several tests—for example, the "Arrange" part of tests.                                             |
| @After         | Indicates that the method runs immediately after every test. It's used when there's a repetitive cleanup task that's performed by several tests—for example, deleting temp files or rolling back database transactions.     |

## Viewing tests

You can view tests in the **Run** window of IntelliJ. It opens automatically once you've run a test.

## Running tests

You can run the tests in a file by right-clicking on the file in project view or in the code editor, and selecting **Run 'FooTest'**, where "FooTest" is the name of your class.

You can run one test by right-clicking inside a test method in the code editor, and selecting the option **Run 'method_test()'**, where "method_test" is the name of your test method.

There are also **Run** buttons on the toolbar and along side the code editor, and you can use them to run tests in IntelliJ.

Once you've run tests, you can run tests again from the **Run** window using either the **Rerun 'FooTest'** or **Rerun Failed Tests** buttons.

## Debugging tests

You can debug a unit test by inserting a breakpoint, then right-clicking in the code editor and selecting **Debug 'FooTest'** or **Debug 'method_test()'**. Another way is to click the **Debug** button on the toolbar, or selecting **Debug 'FooTest'** when right-clicking on a file in the **Project** window.

>**🛈 Warning: Watch out for errors in tests**
>
>One common issue that can cause confusion is when a test doesn't pass due to an error **_in the test_**.
>
>When there is an error in a test, such as a null pointer exception, the test doesn't pass, but this doesn't mean there's a problem with the method being tested.
>
>When a test doesn't pass, use the debugger. It can help you determine if the problem is with the test you've written or if the test is failing "legitimately" because the code being tested isn't doing what the unit test expects it to do.

## Example test method

An example of a JUnit test looks like this. Notice the **Arrange-Act-Assert** pattern:

```java
@Test
public void length_returns_the_number_of_characters_in_a_String() {

    // Arrange
    String theString = "Java";

    // Act
    int length = theString.length();

    // Assert
    Assert.assertEquals(4, length);

    /* The assertEquals method validates that two values are equal
        * and fails the test if they are not equal */
}
```
