# Classes

Programmers often need to solve problems that the Java language doesn't have an out-of-the-box solution for. For example, e-commerce sites require "shopping carts." Social media sites need "user profiles."

To create these sorts of applications, programmers need to represent things like shopping carts and user profiles as custom data types. Using classes, they can define what characteristics and behaviors a data type has.

Here are some of the characteristics and behaviors of a clock:

-   A clock has a current time, based on an hour, minute, and second.
-   A clock can be set to a specific time.
-   A clock tracks time by ticking one second at a time.

Defining characteristics and behaviors within a class helps programmers write clean code. Code remains in its place and can be reused at any time. Programmers can create as many _instances of objects_ from the class _blueprint_ as needed. Each instance of the object exhibits the same characteristics and behaviors as defined in the class.

Now, you'll build your own application from an object-based design perspective. First, you'll create **classes**, which serve as blueprints that indicate what variables and methods an object has. Variables and properties represent an object's characteristics, or **state**, and methods define an object's **behaviors**.

## Note: Encapsulation
The bundling of an object's state and behaviors together is part of the definition of **encapsulation**, the first pillar of object-oriented programming. You'll see this term come up again later in this unit as you learn more about classes.

It takes time to become proficient in object modeling. This unit covers the basics.

## Creating classes
The following example shows how to create a class:

```java
// Clock.java
public class Clock {

}
```

The keyword `class` allows you to create your own data type.

## Creating an instance of a class
To declare variables, you might type the following:

```java
int count = 18;
String name = "Bill";
```

To declare a new instance of your class, you type something similar:

```java
Clock clock = new Clock();
```

This code declares a variable of type `Clock`, named `clock`. The next part of the expression—`new Clock()`—allocates memory to hold a newly _constructed_ instance of the `Clock` class. The `clock` variable stores a reference to that memory location.

## Tip: Don't forget `new`
Remember to use the `new` keyword when working with reference types. Each variable references a different memory location on the heap where the object resides.