# The static modifier

In Java, the `static` keyword declares that a property or method belongs to the _class_ itself—such as the `Clock` class—and not an _instance_ of it—like `grandfather` and `watch`.

Static properties and methods are useful when there's data or behaviors that shouldn't belong to any instances but are still accessible from all of them. Regardless of which instance accesses or changes the data, it'll be the same for all.

One way to think of `static` properties and methods is that there's only one version of it, regardless of how many instances there are.

## Static properties
Say you wanted to track how many instances of the `Clock` class you have. You could set up a variable and remember to increment that every time you create a new `Clock`, but that would be tedious and error-prone. That variable might not be accessible everywhere that you instantiate a new `Clock`.

Since the number of `Clock` objects is data related to clocks, it belongs in the `Clock` class, and you can increment it every time the constructor is called.

In the following example, there's a new property called `numberOfClocks` that has the `static` modifier, and the property is incremented in the constructor method. Every time a new instance of `Clock` is created, the `numberOfClocks` increases by one.

Also, look at the code in `Program.java`. You call the getter with the `Clock` class itself—`Clock.getNumberOfClocks()`—and not by the `grandfather` or `watch` instances because it's a class method. It's `static` too so it can access the `private static` class variable, `numberOfClocks`. The [static methods](https://lms.techelevator.com/cohorts/42/blocks/9/content_files/01_Classes_and_Encapsulation/06-static-modifier.md#static-methods) section explains why the getter also needs to be `static`:

```java
// Clock.java
public class Clock {
    private int hour;
    private int minute;
    private int second;

    private static int numberOfClocks; //static property

    public Clock(int hour, int minute, int second) {
        this.hour = hour;
        this.minute = minute;
        this.second = second;
        numberOfClocks++; //numberOfClocks is incremented
    }

    public static int getNumberOfClocks() { //static getter
        return numberOfClocks;
    }
}
```

```java
// Program.java
public static void main(String[] args) {

    Clock grandfather = new Clock(11, 17, 42);
    System.out.println("The number of clocks is " + Clock.getNumberOfClocks());
    // Outputs "The number of clocks is 1"

    Clock watch = new Clock(16, 11, 1);
    System.out.println("The number of clocks is " + Clock.getNumberOfClocks());
    // Outputs "The number of clocks is 2"
}
```

## Tip: Why is there no "this" for the static property?
If you recall, `this` refers to "this specific instance" of a class. Since static properties belong to the _class_ and not the _instance_, you can't use `this` to refer to static properties.

### Constants
You learned about constants in an earlier unit, using the `final` keyword. Constants are often declared to be `static` as well. This is because when you declare a property to be `static`, it's only allocated memory once, even if it's part of a non-`static` class that has been instantiated more than once. This is a memory saving technique built into the Java language.

That earlier unit also introduced the concept of _magic numbers_. A magic number in programming is a unique value whose meaning is based upon its context, and you can't infer the significance of that value. In the following example, `24` is a magic number:

```java
int days = 2;

// ....

int numberOfHoursAwake = 24 * days;
```

In the `Clock` example, the `tick()` method uses magic numbers when determining if the seconds, minutes, or hours need to roll over. In fact, the number `60` means two different things: the number of seconds in a minute and the number of minutes in an hour. It'd be better if the numbers' meanings were explicitly called out. You can refactor this with static constants:

```java
// Clock.java
public class Clock {

    private static final int SECONDS_IN_A_MINUTE = 60;
    private static final int MINUTES_IN_AN_HOUR = 60;
    private static final int HOURS_IN_A_DAY = 24;

    private int hour;
    private int minute;
    private int second;

    public void tick() {
        this.second += 1;

        if (this.second >= SECONDS_IN_A_MINUTE) {
            this.minute += 1;
            this.second = 0;
        }

        if (this.minute >= MINUTES_IN_AN_HOUR) {
            this.hour += 1;
            this.minute = 0;
        }

        if (this.hour >= HOURS_IN_A_DAY) {
            this.hour = 0;
        }
    }
}
```

Notice the three new `private static final` variables—`SECONDS_IN_A_MINUTE`, `MINUTES_IN_AN_HOUR`, and `HOURS_IN_A_DAY`—and their usage in the `tick()` method. Now the code is much more readable.

## Tip: Follow Java coding conventions
Constants in Java are typically written in all uppercase with underscores `_` in between words.

## Static methods
You can declare methods `static` like variables. The same rules apply: the `static` method belongs to the _class_ itself and not an _instance_ of it. You call it by using the class name, not the instance.

`static` methods are useful in a variety of scenarios. One good example is **utility methods**, or methods that help you perform a function but don't require an instance of an object.

Say for the `Clock` example, you wanted to create a function that converted a given time—not the time of an instance—into the number of seconds since midnight:

```java
// Clock.java
public class Clock {
    private static final int SECONDS_IN_A_MINUTE = 60;
    private static final int MINUTES_IN_AN_HOUR = 60;
    private static final int HOURS_IN_A_DAY = 24;

    private int hour;
    private int minute;
    private int second;

    private static int numberOfClocks;

    public Clock(int hour, int minute, int second) {
        this.hour = hour;
        this.minute = minute;
        this.second = second;
        numberOfClocks++;
    }

    public static int getNumberOfClocks() {
        return numberOfClocks;
    }

    public static int getNumberOfSeconds(int hours, int minutes, int seconds) {
        return
          (hours * MINUTES_IN_AN_HOUR * SECONDS_IN_A_MINUTE) +
          (minutes * SECONDS_IN_A_MINUTE) +
          (seconds);
    }

    public void tick()
    {
        //...
    }
}
```

```java
// Program.java
public static void main(String[] args) {
    // get the number of seconds since midnight for 1:20:23
    System.out.println(Clock.getNumberOfSeconds(1, 20, 23)); //4823
}
```

Notice that `Program.java` calls `Clock.getNumberOfSeconds()` without an instance existing, and that the method is `static` in `Clock.java`.

There's an important limitation to keep in mind when working with `static` methods and properties. `static` methods can _only_ access other `static` methods or properties. If it's not `static`, you can't use it in a `static` method.

The `getNumberOfSeconds()` method can use the properties like `SECONDS_IN_A_MINUTE` because it's declared `static`. However, `getNumberOfSeconds()` wouldn't be able to call the `tick()` method because it's not `static`.