# Organization of classes

When you began learning about Collections, you were briefly introduced to the concept of **packages**. Packages are a way to organize classes similar to organizing files on your computer. Like how you can find the photos from your last vacation in the `Pictures` folder on your computer, you can find the utility classes for Java in the `java.util` package.

Organizing classes like this also serves another purpose. Say you wanted to name your class `List`, and you didn't know that there was already a `List` class in `java.util`. Because your class is in a different package, like `com.myawesomecode.List`, it's technically different than `java.util.List`.

The same thing applies to files on your computer: you can have two files with the same name, but in different folders. The Java compiler knows which `List` you want because you specify which one you want to `import`.

Giving package names to your classes isn't required, but it's a best practice and you're strongly encouraged to do so. The package name must appear as the first line in your code. This is like saving a file to a specific folder on your computer—the Java compiler stores your class in a specific package. You may have already noticed them in the code you've been working with up to now:

```java
package com.techelevator.codesamples;

public class NiftyClass {
    ...
}
```

If you wanted to use the `NiftyClass` in another application, you'd import it like so:

```java
package com.myawesomecode;

import com.techelevator.codesamples.NiftyClass;

public class MyAwesomeClass {
    NiftyClass nifty = new NiftyClass();
}
```

If the `com.techelevator.codesamples` package included other classes that you wanted to use, you'd import it like this:

```java
import com.techelevator.codesamples.*;
```

Some of the package names you've seen started with `com`. There are naming conventions for packages in Java. Typically, package names start with the "top-level domain" of a website. So, the `com` you see in the package name is the same as you see in websites like `techelevator.com`.

Next comes your domain or organization name—for example, `com.techelevator`. After that, it's up to the developer what organization of packages fits best, whether it be by functional purpose, versioning, or language. Lastly, it's standard for package names to be lowercase.

> Note: The packages that start with `java` are built-in packages.

If you want, you can read Java's documentation on [Naming Packages](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/package/namingpkgs.html) .