# What's a package?

When you write software, you don't need to write everything from scratch. The language or framework that you use provides many capabilities. For example, you don't need to convert a string into an array to get a substring or the character at a particular index. You use built-in functions that do that for you.

You can also import other code into your projects that offers more features, like file I/O or a web server. Sometimes this other code comes with the language, and you only need to import the library or namespace into your code.

There are other times you need to download an external library or module to get other capabilities. Typically these libraries are available as **packages**.

A package is a type of file archive that contains code or executables and associated information like the package name, version number, and dependencies necessary for it to run properly. Dependencies are often other packages available from the same source.

Packages are installed and managed by a **package manager**. A package manager is a set of tools that automates the process of installing, upgrading, and configuring, and removing packages in a consistent manner.

Package managers work with a **package repository** or **package registry**, which is a central storage location for packages. Package repositories may contain packages for a particular programming language, IDE, or an entire operating system.

---

# Why package managers?

Package managers are useful for many reasons:

-   They offer a simple and consistent way to install, uninstall, and upgrade software. You can install packages with a single command or click of a button.
-   They automatically install and handle dependencies, which saves you time.
-   You can install any published version of a package. Sometimes you'll find a library is only compatible with a specific version of another. It's also beneficial to keep all team members on the same version when developing software.
-   Because the packages are available online, you don't need to store the code from the packages in your source control. You only need to store the list of packages. This helps to save space in your source control repository.
-   They establish a shared convention for managing libraries. When new developers join a project or team, they may know how to use the package manager and can start contributing code sooner.

---

# NPM

**NPM** is a package manager for JavaScript code. It's one of the most widely used package managers in software development and is often touted as having the largest repository.

Its name is short for **Node.js Package Manager**. Node.js is a runtime environment for running complex applications in JavaScript without a browser.

NPM packages are written in JavaScript. Some packages provide code that can be imported into another JavaScript application, while others provide a tool or utility that runs with the help of Node.js. Most packages have instructions that are bundled with it or available online that explain how to use it.

## The `package.json` file

NPM stores the information of the packages you use for a project in a file named `package.json`. This file also usually contains other information about the project like its name and version.

An example `package.json` file might look like this:

```json
{
  "name": "my-project",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "A Vue.js project",
  "private": true,
  "scripts": {
    "serve": "vue-cli-service serve",
    "build": "vue-cli-service build",
    "test:unit": "vue-cli-service test:unit"
  },
  "dependencies": {
    "core-js": "^3.6.5",
    "vue": "^2.6.11"
  },
  "devDependencies": {
    "@vue/cli-plugin-babel": "~4.5.0",
    "@vue/cli-plugin-unit-mocha": "~4.5.0",
    "@vue/cli-service": "~4.5.0",
    "@vue/test-utils": "^1.0.3",
    "chai": "^4.1.2",
    "vue-template-compiler": "^2.6.11"
  }
}
```

The `package.json` file can contain a lot of different information, but it's important to at least become familiar with the `scripts` and `dependencies` sections.

The `scripts` section contains `npm` commands that you run from the command line to perform tasks like building the application and running tests. You'll learn about `npm` commands later in this unit.

The `dependencies` section contains all the packages that you've added to your project. The similarly named `devDependencies` is for packages only needed for development, like unit testing frameworks. Each key-value pair represents an NPM package and the desired version.

>**🛈 Note: about NPM version syntax**
>
>You may have seen version numbers like `1.7.2` and `14.6` before, but what about `~4.5.0` or `^1.0.3`?
>
>The `~` and `^` indicate the update types your project can accept:
>
>-   A version like `~1.13.0` means you want to update only the last decimal, called patch releases. `1.13.1` is okay, but `1.14.0` isn't.
>-   A version like `^1.13.0` means you want to update patch and minor releases. `1.13.1` and `1.14.0` is okay, but `2.0` or higher isn't.
>-   Not using either, like `1.13.0`, means that's the exact version to use, and no other versions are acceptable.

There's another related file named `package-lock.json`. This file is like the dependencies stored in `package.json` but it tracks the **exact** version of every package that's installed. The version in `package.json` might be `^1.13.0`, but `package-lock.json` tracks that version `1.16.2` is being used. This is so that a product is 100% reproducible in the same way.

Typically, you don't edit either file directly. They're updated by `npm`.

The `package.json` and `package-lock.json` files are normally added to source control, so other developers on the project can use the same setup.

## The `node_modules` folder

The packages that you install for a project are stored in the `node_modules` folder at the root of your project directory. Like with the `package.json`, you likely won't need to directly interact with anything in the folder, unless you're doing some low-level troubleshooting.

Unlike the `package.json` and `package-lock.json` files, the `node_modules` folder isn't added to source control. This folder can be several hundred megabytes or even gigabytes, and the entire contents can be reproduced on another developer's computer because of the `package.json` and `package-lock.json` files.

## NPM package registry

NPM provides a web interface to look up and research packages at their [website](https://www.npmjs.com/) .

---

# Verifying installation

NPM is often installed along with the Node.js environment. You can verify NPM is installed by running this on the command-line:

```shell
npm --version
```

If you receive output that looks like `6.14.11`, that means NPM is installed.

The exact version number you receive may be different, but anything that starts with a `6` or higher is good.

---

# Using npm

NPM packages are installed and run with the use of the `npm` command-line application.

The `npm` command offers many features, but this guide covers only some of the basics.

The examples in this lesson use this sample `package.json`:

```json
{
  "name": "server",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "scripts": {
    "start": "json-server data.json",
    "reset": "json-server reset.js"
  },
  "dependencies": {
    "faker": "^4.1.0",
    "json-server": "^0.16.1"
  }
}
```

## Installing project dependencies

When you start working on an existing project, you'll usually need to download and install all dependencies the project uses. In this example, there are two dependencies—`faker` and `json-server`.

From the command line, while in the same folder as the `package.json` file, you run this to install all dependencies:

```shell
npm install
```

You'll see `npm` download and extract all packages specified in `package.json`, as well as any dependencies they may have. Depending on the size of the project and the speed of the internet connection, this may take some time.

When it's done, `npm` prints out a summary similar to this:

```
added 230 packages from 125 contributors and audited 230 packages in 7.963s
```

## Installing a package

To add a new package, you use the same command but also specify the package name. To install the [`cowsay`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/cowsay) package, you run this command:

```shell
npm install cowsay
```

Running that command installs the latest version of the package, which for `cowsay` is version 1.5.0 at the time of this writing.

If you wanted an older version, for example 1.3.1, you can specify the version too:

```shell
npm install cowsay@1.3.1
```

### Installing globally

You can also install a package **globally**, which means that it can be run from anywhere on your computer and doesn't belong to a project. This is useful for utility packages that you may use on different projects.

To install globally, you use the `-g` option:

```shell
npm install -g cowsay
```

You can specify versions for global installs too:

```shell
npm install -g cowsay@1.3.1
```

You may need administrator permissions to install a global package:

-   Windows: you need to launch your shell application by using the **Run as administrator** option, usually available by right-clicking on the application.
    
-   macOS and Linux: you can use `sudo` in front of the command: `sudo npm install -g cowsay`.
    

>**⚠ Danger: Be very careful with `sudo`.**
>
>`sudo` stands for "superuser do" and allows you to run commands as the "superuser", or administrator, of Unix-like operating systems. You can damage important operating system files with it if you're not careful, so make sure you know what you're doing when you use it.

## Running tasks

In `package.json`, the `scripts` section specifies the various tasks that `npm` can run. The tasks that are available, and what they do, may vary depending on what you have installed. They're typically used for building projects and running tests, but anything that relies on an NPM package can be specified here.

To run the `start` script from the earlier example, you use this command:

```shell
npm run start
```

That command instructs `npm` to run the `json-server` package, passing `data.json` to it as a parameter. Most packages can't be run directly on the command line. They have to be run through `npm`.

If you want to know what scripts are available, you can run `npm run` without a name and it'll display a list of available scripts:

```shell
npm run
...
  start
    json-server data.json
  reset
    json-server reset.js
```

### Running a global package

When you install a global package, `npm` automatically provides a script that you _can_ run on the command line.

If you installed `cowsay` globally, like in [the earlier example](https://lms.techelevator.com/cohorts/94/blocks/5/content_files/npm/05-using-npm.md#installing-globally), you can then run it from the command line:

```shell
cowsay "I love NPM!"
 _____________
< I love NPM! >
 -------------
        \   ^__^
         \  (oo)\_______
            (__)\       )\/\
                ||----w |
                ||     ||
```
