# Traversing the DOM

There may be times when you don't know which selector to choose an element with, or you need to work with a specific child of an element and need to loop through or walk through a list of elements. For this, you can use some element properties to get an element's children or parent.

## Selecting children with children and childNodes

If you select an element:

```js
let todoList = document.getElementById('todo-list');
```

You can get all of its immediate children **_elements_** through the `children` property:

```js
let todoItems = todoList.children;
```

`children` returns an `HTMLCollection` object, which you can turn into a real array with access to `map`, `forEach`, and all the other array functions with this:

```js
let todoItemsArray = Array.from(todoList.children);
```

You can also get children by calling `childNodes`:

```js
let todoNodes = todoList.childNodes;
```

This returns a `NodeList` object that contains all the **_nodes_** inside that element. You can also pass this to `Array.from()` to get a normal JavaScript array.

### What's the difference between `children` and `childNodes`?

`children` returns **elements** that are children of this element. That means that it only contains other HTML elements and **_not_** the text that might be in the element.

`childNodes` returns **nodes** that are children of this element. That _includes_ text (including whitespace) and comments that are in the DOM.

For example, if you had the following DOM structure:

```html
<p id="message">
  This is an <strong>awesome</strong> paragraph.
  <!-- with a comment -->
</p>
```

Calling `children` on the `p` element returns one child: the `strong` element. `children` only returns the children DOM elements. There's only one element inside the `p`, and that's the `strong` element.

Calling `childNodes` on the `p` element returns five children. The first is a text node containing 'This is an ', the next is a strong element, the next is another text node containing ' paragraph.', then a comment node holding 'with a comment', and finally a text node that holds the newline after the comment.

The one that you use depends on what you want to do.

## Getting an element's `parentNode`

You can access an element's parent using the `parentNode` attribute:

```js
let todoList = document.getElementById('todo-list');
let todoListsParent = todoList.parentNode;
```

## Getting adjacent elements with `nextElementSibling` and `previousElementSibling`

You can select the next and previous sibling—an element that has the same parent—by using the `nextElementSibling` and `previousElementSibling` properties:

```js
// Get the first line item of the todo list
let firstTodo = document.querySelector('.todo');

// Get the next line item
let secondTodo = firstTodo.nextElementSibling;
let thirdTodo = secondTodo.nextElementSibling;
```

## Removing elements with `removeChild()`

You can remove elements with the `removeChild()` method:

```js
// Get the todo list
let todoList = document.getElementById('todo-list');

// Remove the first item
todoList.removeChild(todoList.children[0]);
```

Notice that you remove a DOM element by calling `removeChild()` from its parent. In the preceding example, `todoList` is the parent element and `removeChild()` deletes the first of its children.

You can remove an element even if you don't know the name of its parent element. Use `parentNode` to reference the parent of the element that you want to remove, then call `removeChild()` from it:

```js
// Get the first line item of the todo list
let firstTodo = document.querySelector('.todo');

// Remove it, using its parent property
firstTodo.parentNode.removeChild(firstTodo);
```