# Primary and foreign keys

Before moving on to the next part of the `SELECT` statement, you'll learn about the relationships in your database.

Relational databases are about the links that you form between your tables and not just the data in them. The power of your databases comes from the fact that you can treat your data as discrete objects of data and then combine them to figure out information about the data.

For a concrete example, imagine that you had two tables in your database—a table of cities and a table of countries:

**country** 

| **country_id** | **name** |
| -------------- | -------- |
| 1              | Canada   |
| 2              | Mexico   |
| 3              | Cuba     |
| 4              | France   |
| 5              | Spain    |
| 6              | Italy    |
| 7              | China    |

**city**

| **city_id** | **country_id** | **name** |
| ----------- | -------------- | -------- |
| 1           | 6              | Milan    |
| 2           | 6              | Rome     |
| 3           | 7              | Beijing  |
| 4           | 4              | Nice     |
| 5           | 4              | Paris    |
| 6           | 1              | Toronto  |
| 7           | 5              | Seville  |

In these examples, the `country_id` column of the `country` table and `city_id` of the `city` table are **primary keys**. Primary key columns are columns that hold a value that's unique for every row in that table. Those are identifiers that you can use to get a specific row of data.

If you want to get the row from the country table that has `country_id` of 4, you know that you'll get back France. Since the `country_id` column is set up as the primary key—something that you add as a **constraint** on that table when you create it—you also know that each row's id is unique in that table.

The city table has a `city_id` column, which is the primary key for that table. There's also a column called `country_id`. That column is a **foreign key**. It references the country table and links a city to a certain country. By creating these primary and foreign keys, you can make your data truly relational and model how these two pieces of data link to each other in the real world.