# Quiz

**Unit Testing 1**

Which of the following is an advantage of manual tests compared to automated tests?

○ Test execution is faster

○ More consistent test results

○ Less expensive to run

◉ Can give qualitative results

**Explanation:** Since manual tests are performed by a person interacting with a program like an end user would, they're slower and more costly. However, they can provide feedback about subjective qualities of a program, like usability.

---

**Unit Testing 2**

Which of the following statements are true of **unit tests**?

	Select all correct options

□ They're typically run by the product owner.

■ They isolate each part of the program to show that individual parts are correct.

□ They mimic human interactions with the program's user interface.

■ They're always automated tests.

□ They're primarily used at the end of development, immediately prior to release.

**Explanation:** Unit tests are always automated and focus one one method at a time, rather than interacting with the whole program the way a user would. Developers typically run them throughout the development process.

---

**Unit Testing 3**

True or False: You need to write a unit test for every getter and setter method to make sure they all work as expected.

○ True

◉ False

**Explanation:** While there's no need to test every basic getter and setter, a unit test would be a good idea if the method had significant logic involved, like in the case of a getter for a complex derived property.

---

**Unit Testing 4**

In what order should a unit test perform the following steps:

▤ Arrange

▤ Act

▤ Assert

**Explanation:** This is the standard pattern for unit tests. You may also see it referred to as Given-When-Then.

---

**Unit Testing 5**

You're testing a `Calculator` class that has an `add()` method that takes two `int`s and returns the result of adding them together. Assuming the `add()` method works correctly, what happens when you run the following test?

```java
@Test
public void add_returns_the_correct_sum() {
    Calculator calculator = null;

    int result = calculator.add(2, 3);

    Assert.assertEquals(5, result);
}
```

○ The test passes

◉ The test doesn't pass

○ The test won't run because it's not a valid JUnit test

**Explanation:** Even though there's no problem with the method being tested, the test doesn't pass because a `NullPointerException` occurs when the test tries to call `calculator.add(2, 3)` since `calculator` is null.

---

**Unit Testing 6**

Now you're testing a `subtract()` method that takes two `int`s and returns the result of subtracting the first value from the second value. Assuming the `subtract()` method works correctly, what happens when you run the following test?

```java
@Test
public void subtract_returns_the_correct_difference() {
    Calculator calculator = new Calculator();

    int result = calculator.subtract(9, 10);

    Assert.assertEquals(1, result);
}
```

◉ The test passes

○ The test doesn't pass

○ The test won't run because it's not a valid JUnit test

**Explanation:** This test is valid, runs without errors, and the method being tested returns the expected result.

---

**Unit Testing 7**

You're writing unit tests for a method called `findMatchingNames()` that takes a single `char` parameter and returns a list of names that begin with that character. The parameter is normally expected to be in the range A-Z. Which of the following parameter values should you be sure to include tests for?

	Select all correct options

■ A and Z

□ All the characters between A and Z

■ A character outside the A-Z range

□ null

**Explanation:** It's important to include tests for the edge cases of A and Z and the error condition of a character outside the A-Z range.

---

**Unit Testing 8**

When you run the tests in this class, how many failing tests does JUnit report?

```java
public class DemoTest {

    @Test
    public void this_test_passes() {
        Assert.assertTrue(true);
    }

    public void this_test_fails() {
        Assert.assertTrue(false);
    }

    public void this_test_also_passes() {
        Assert.assertTrue(true);
    }
}
```

**Answer:** 0

**Explanation:** JUnit reports zero failing tests, since only one method is marked with the `@Test` annotation and it passes.

---

**Unit Testing 9**

You're writing unit tests and notice that the "arrange" step is the same for all of them. So, you factor out the common code and put it into a separate method within the test class. What annotation should that new method have?

**Answer:** `@Before`

**Explanation:** A method with the `@Before` annotation runs before each test method.
