# What makes a good unit test?

Good unit tests have the following characteristics:

-   Fast: elapsed time of running a unit test should be measured in milliseconds.
-   Reliable and repeatable: if a test passed or failed once, it should pass or fail again, assuming no code changes.
-   Independent: a test can run independently of other tests, and tests don't interact with one another.
-   Obvious: when a test fails, it's clear why it failed.

## What to test

It's always best to test what makes sense. You don't need to write unit tests to make sure that your getters and setters work.

Instead, test your logic. There are many tools you can use to test your code coverage. However, you want to make sure that all of your logic is tested, too. For example, you'd want to test a method that returns a letter grade for a given score.

Unit tests must check happy paths, error conditions, and edge cases. In the previous example, you might be tempted to say, "test every single score." Instead, you should test both edge cases for each grade, negatives, and nulls.

## What does a unit test look like?

When discussing unit tests, you may hear others mention the three _A_'s:

-   **Arrange**: begin by arranging the conditions of the test, such as setting up test data.
-   **Act**: perform the action of interest—meaning, the thing you're testing.
-   **Assert**: validate that the expected outcome occurred by means of an assertion—that is, a certain value was returned, or a file exists.

You'll learn more about the three _A_'s in the next lesson.