# Array recap

When you first learned about arrays, you were taught to declare one by defining its data type and how many elements it holds using this syntax:

```java
int[] ages = new int[3];            // an array, size 3, of integers
String[] groceries = new String[5]; // an array, size 5, of Strings
```

Although arrays are a convenient way to work with a collection of values, they come with a significant limitation. Once you create an array, its size is **_fixed_**.

The `groceries` array only has room for five items: "bananas", "cheese", "pretzels", "rice", and "walnuts." You can't add a sixth, even if you need to add "chocolate." While there are ways to work around this limitation, they're inconvenient and time-consuming.

For instance, if you want to insert a new element into the middle of an array, you'd need to:

1.  Create a new array `B` that's larger than the existing array `A` by 1.
2.  Copy all elements from array `A` to array `B` up until the place you wish to insert after.
3.  Insert the new value into array `B`.
4.  Copy the remaining elements from array `A` to array `B`.
5.  Throw out array `A`.

At first glance, this seems doable. There's a small performance hit as the code creates, copies, inserts, and finally discards the original array. However, the `groceries` array only has five items, so it's an acceptable tradeoff.

But if the `groceries` array had 500 items, you'd be in trouble. If adding to, removing from, and rearranging items in the array is a key feature of a given application which might be performed multiple times in a single session, your application's performance would suffer.

The need to handle lists of unknown size is so common that the Java language contains several special classes to handle this. These classes belong to the Collections library.
