# Collections library

## Data structures
Arrays and the classes in the Collections library are generally referred to as **data structures**. A data structure is a collection of values, the relationships among the values, and the operations that can be performed on the values.

For example, an array contains values where each element is contiguous to the next in a fixed block of memory. The array allows indexing to each element to read or write the indexed value.

You don't need to understand the internal implementations of the various data structures in the Collections library, but it's important to understand the purpose and usage of the various classes. Each class has its own advantages and disadvantages and allows particular operations based on its overall purpose.

## Importing the Collections library
Unlike arrays, which are built directly into the Java language, you need to import the Collections library to use it in your code. To do this, you use an `import` statement.

Well-designed Java libraries like Collections gather all the classes that make them up into containers called "packages." You'll learn more about packages later.

Packages are important here because it's the Collections package as a whole, or the individual classes within it, that you'll import.

For example, the first Collections classes discussed are `java.util.List` and `java.util.ArrayList`. You import them into your code with the following `import` statements:

```java
package com.techelevator;

// Importing List and ArrayList
import java.util.List;
import java.util.ArrayList;

public class Exercise {
    ...
}
```

`import` statements always appear between the `package` and `class` lines.

You could omit the `import` statement, but you'd have to refer to all data types with a full package name, like `java.util.List`. Once the `import` statement is used, you can define it as `List` instead.

If you're interested in learning more about `import`, go to [Java Tutorials: Using Package Members](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/package/usepkgs.html) .

## Types and type-safety
All the Collections classes are type-safe. As with arrays, you must declare a data type for each class in the library. The most commonly used Collections class is `List<T>`.

`List` is the name of the class, while `<T>` is shorthand notation that means "a data type goes here." So, when you see `List<T>`, it means you supply a data type where the `T` is. Some examples include `List<String>`, `List<Integer>`, and `List<Employee>`.

>🛈 Note: The combined data type
>
>The data type of Collections classes like `List<T>` is a combination of the class name plus the data type the class contains.

So, `List<String>` is a different data type than `List<Integer>`, which are both different from `List<Employee>`. The data types are described as "a list of strings", "a list of integers", and "a list of employees."

Anywhere you see a `T` between the two angle-brackets `<>`, you provide a type. Some Collection classes require multiple data types, so `<T, T>` means you need to supply two types. The types don't have to be the same, and in many cases they won't be:

```java
<String, Integer>
<Integer, Employee>
```

Once you've declared the types of data the Collections class contains, the Java compiler prevents you from using a different type:

```java
// Assuming a list of names as Strings, you can't add an integer
names.add(23);  // Compilation error: invalid data type
```
