# Introduction

Recently you've learned how to create web APIs in a server application and how to consume those methods in a client application. As you saw with the API methods you wrote, you can provide ways to add, edit, and delete information.

In the real world, APIs may even retrieve and return sensitive information. How can you secure these API methods on the server? How would you access the API in a client application?

The answer to those questions is authentication and authorization. While they're similar sounding words and both are related to security, they're different terms.

## What's authentication? What's authorization?

**Authentication** is the process of validating that users are who they claim to be. Passwords are the most common authentication factor. If a user enters the correct username and password, the system assumes the identity is valid and grants access.

**Authorization** is the process of giving a user permission to access a specific resource or function. For example, Alice may see and update salaries, but Bob may only see them.

## Forms of authentication

There are three distinct categories of authentication factors:

-   **Knowledge factors** are something the user _knows_. Examples: passwords, personal identification numbers (PINs), and security questions such as "What is your mother's maiden name?"
-   **Ownership factors** are something the user _has_. Examples: physical USB security keys, and cell phones receiving one-time codes through text messages (SMS) or authentication apps like Google Authenticator.
-   **Inherence factors** are something the user _is_ or _does_. Examples: fingerprints, face scan, voice, signature, retinal pattern.

Software applications can use any factor to identify a user. You're already familiar with entering a password to access your computer, or nearly any website. Some applications may require you to enter a code you received on your phone. This is **two-factor authentication** (2FA) or **multi-factor authentication** (MFA).

Once a user authenticates themselves with your application, how do you continue to verify their identity? If you recall from a previous lesson, HTTP is a stateless protocol. This means the server can't tell if any two requests are from the same client. Because of that, each request must contain information about the user's identity.