# Loosely coupled code

To understand what loosely coupled code is, you need to know what **_tightly coupled_** code is and why it's bad.

**Coupling** is a measure of how closely connected two pieces of software are and how much they depend on each other. If you write your code in a way where changing one thing, like replacing a class or method with another, causes a ripple effect of changes that need to be made in other parts of your code, you've written **_tightly coupled_** code.

Ideally, you want to write your code in a way where one part doesn't have to rely heavily on the other being written or behaving in a certain way. Another way to phrase it: you don't want your components to know how the other one works.

Being able to write loosely coupled code is an important aspect of being a programmer. You're just learning how to write your own classes now, but as with many things, it's better to start with a good habit rather than breaking a bad habit later. You'll dive deeper into this topic at a later date, but it's good to keep in mind and start thinking about it now.

You saw examples of loosely coupled code when working with Collections. The reason you used `List` and `Map` as your variable types is because there are other classes that work with them besides `ArrayList` and `HashMap`:

```java
List<T> list = new ArrayList<T>();
Map<T> map = new HashMap<T>();
```

If you decided to replace the `ArrayList<T>` with `LinkedList<T>`, that would likely that would be the only line of code that needs to change and everything would still work as expected.

If you started off with defining the variable type as `ArrayList` and wanted to change it to `LinkedList` later, you might have to change more than that one line because they have different methods and behave differently. If you used the `List<T>` methods, the behavior would be the same.

If this sounds confusing, don't worry. It takes time to understand the concept of loosely coupled code. Over the next few lessons, you'll learn all the tools you'll need to write loosely coupled code.
