# Quiz

## **Classes and Encapsulation 1**

**Which of these ideas are associated with encapsulation? (Select all that apply)**

	Select all correct options

■ Bundling object state and behavior

□ Validating user input

■ Restricting direct access to internal properties

□ Overloading methods

**Explanation:** Encapsulation supports and protects the internal logic and consistency of a class through bundling object state and behavior and restricting direct access to internal properties,


## **Classes and Encapsulation 2**

**Given the following code, what's the setter for `lastName`?**

```java
public class Person {
    private String lastName;
    ...
}
```

○
```java
public String setLastName(String lastName) {
	this.lastName = lastName;
	return lastName;
}
```

○
```java
public void setLastName() {
	lastName = lastName;
}
```

○ 
```java
public void lastNameSet(String lastName) {
	this.lastName = lastName;
}
```

◉ 
```java
public void setLastName(String lastName) {
	this.lastName = lastName;
}
```

**Explanation:** Setters always begin with set followed by the name of the variable they're setting, take a single parameter with the same data type as the variable they set, and have a void return type.


## **Classes and Encapsulation 3**

**What does it mean to declare a property or method as `static`?**

○ The property or method can be accessed from any other class.

○ The property or method is loosely coupled.

◉ The property or method belongs to the class, and not an instance.

○ The property or method contains noise and nothing useful.

**Explanation:** Static properties and static methods can be used without creating an instance of a class.


## **Classes and Encapsulation 4**

```java
public String makeCopies(String original, int numberOfCopies) {...}
```

**Which one of the following methods has the same method signature as `makeCopies`?**

○ 
```java
public String repeatString(String original, int numberOfCopies) {...}
```

○
```java
public String makeCopies(String original, long numberOfCopies) {...}
```

○ 
```java
public String makeCopies(String original) {...}
```

◉ 
```java
private String makeCopies(String starter, int count) {...}
```

**Explanation:** The method signature is the same since the name of the method and the types of its parameters are the same. Changing the access modifier to `private` and changing the names of the parameters doesn't change the method signature.


## **Classes and Encapsulation 5**

**Which of the following statements are correct? (Select all that apply)**

	Select all correct options

■ A class is a blueprint that defines the state and behaviors of a data type.

□ A class can be overloaded.

□ String is a primitive data type.

■ An object is an instance of a class.

**Explanation:** Classes are blueprints that bring state (properties) and behaviors (methods) together, but they need to be instantiated into an object to be used.


## **Classes and Encapsulation 6**

**What access modifier hides properties and methods?**

○ static

◉ private

○ final

○ public

**Explanation:** The `private` access modifier hides methods and instance variables and prevents access outside the class itself.


## **Classes and Encapsulation 7**

**What occurs when the following code compiles?**

```java
public class Greeter {
    ...
    public String happyBirthday(String name, int age) {
        return "Happy Birthday " + name + "! You are " + age + " years old.";
    }
    public String happyBirthday(int numberOfCandles, String message) {
        return message + "Wow! Your cake has " + numberOfCandles + " candles.";
    }
    ...
}
```

◉ The `happyBirthday` method is _overloaded_ by the Java compiler.

○ The Java compiler throws an error saying there are duplicate `happyBirthday` methods because they have the same name, and both have int and String parameter types.

○ It won't compile since you can't concatenate int values, such as `age` or `numberOfCandles`, to a string.

○ It won't compile since the methods must use `this` to refer to the variables.

**Explanation:** The parameter types **_and_** their order are important in overloading methods. The two methods have int and String parameter types, but in a different order.


## **Classes and Encapsulation 8**

**Given the following code, which is the correct getter for the derived property `fullName`?**

```java
public class Person {

    private String firstName;
    private String lastName;
    ...
}
```

○
```java
public String getFullName(String lastName, String firstName) {
	return lastName + ", " + firstName;
}
```

○ 
```java
private String fullName;    // Additional instance variable
```

○ 
```java
public String getFullName() {
	return this.fullName;
}
```

◉ 
```java
public String getFullName() {
	return this.lastName + ", " + this.firstName;
}
```

○ 
```java
public void getFullName() {
	String fullName = this.lastName + ", " + this.firstName;
	return;
}
```

**Explanation:** A well-formed getter begins with get followed by the name of the property it's getting, has no parameters, and returns the data type of the property it gets.


## **Classes and Encapsulation 9**

**Java packages offer which of the following benefits? (Select all that apply)**

	Select all correct options

□ They reduce memory since all classes in a package are compiled at the same time.

■ They prevent your type names from colliding with others. your.Employee can be distinguished from their.Employee.

■ They allow you to gather classes to logically relate them together.

□ The Java compiler uses packages to optimize compilation which speeds up build-time.

**Explanation:** Packages exist in Java to avoid **_namespace_** collisions, and help document and explain how classes are logically related to one another.


## **Classes and Encapsulation 10**

**Consider the following code:**

```java
public class Greeter {
    private static int numberOfGreetings = 0;

    private static void trackGreetings() {
        numberOfGreetings++;
    }

    public String greet(String message, String name) {
        trackGreetings();   // directly call static trackGreetings()
        return "Hello, " + name + ". " + message;
    }
}
```

○ Does Java allow an _instance_ method to directly call a static method in the same class like this?

○ Yes, any method, regardless of whether it's static or not, can call any other method within the same class.

○ It depends on whether the correct access modifiers are used. They need visibility to one another.

○ Yes, the method signature rules permit instance methods to call static methods provided there is no reference to `this`.

◉ Yes, any static methods of a class are available to the instance methods of that class.

**Explanation:** Instance methods can always call static methods in the same class. Going the other direction is when there's a problem, since static methods don't have any object to call an instance method on.
