# Objects in memory

One important thing to understand about objects is how they're stored in memory. Usually, you wouldn't need to dive down into the hardware and see **_how_** things are working, but for objects, especially in Java, this can be important.

First, you'll learn about the Stack.

## The Stack
When an application runs, there is a memory space set up for it called the Stack. **The Stack** is a set amount of memory that stores some of the basic values. When you create a new `int`, the system knows to reserve exactly 4 bytes, or 32 bits, of space for it. So if you say:

```java
int a = 0;
```

Then the system creates a 4-byte spot in the Stack, calls it `a`, and stores the value of 0 in it.

If you call:

```java
double price = 5.23;
```

Then the system creates an 8-byte spot in the Stack, calls it `price`, and stores 5.23 in it. This happens on the Stack because you know the exact size of the variables.

For all primitive values, this works well. You know exactly what size primitive values are, or can be, so these can be stored on the Stack all day long. But what about this line of code?

```java
int[] numbers;
```

How big can `numbers` be? You know `int`s are 4 bytes each, but you don't know how many `ints` are in `numbers`. So, arrays can't be stored on the Stack. You have to store them in a different, more dynamic memory structure. That structure is called the Heap.

## The Heap
**The Heap** is the memory space where arrays and objects go.

In the previous example, you declared a variable to hold an `int[]`. This variable is still created in the Stack, but the array itself is created in the Heap.

```java
int[] numbers = new int[10];
```

You know it's in the Heap because of the `new` operator. That's the operator that reserves a new hunk of memory on the Heap.

So, the array is created on the Heap and then the **_memory address_** of it is stored in the variable `numbers` on the Stack. When you use the variable `numbers` in your code, it holds a memory address only. Then you access the array in the Heap using either the dot operator (`.`) or brackets (`[]`).

So all variables live on the Stack, but their values might not.

## So what?
Data types that keep their values on the Stack, like `int` and `double`, are called primitives or value types.

Data types that keep their values on the Heap, like arrays and objects, are called reference types.

So what does this mean for you? Look at the following lines of code:

```java
int a = 10;
int b = a;
b = 4;
```

What value is stored in `a` after you run that last line of code? If you understand that these variables hold values, you should be able to figure out that `a` is still `10`. You set `a` to `10`. You then set `b` to the same value that's in `a`. So now, `b` is `10`. Then you set `b` to `4`. The value of `a` doesn't change and is still `10`.

Look at the following code:

```java
int[] a = new int[] {10, 20, 30};
int[] b = a;
b[0] = 100;
```

Now, what's the value stored in `a`? Would you believe `[100, 20, 30]`?

To understand this, you need to understand how `=` works.

The `=` takes the value from one variable and stores it into another variable. For reference variables, the value stored in the variable is a memory address and that memory address transfers to the new variable.

In the previous block of code, you declare a new variable called `a` that contains the address to an `int[]`. You then create a new `int[]` on the Heap and store its address into `a`.

Next, you put that same address from `a` into the declared variable `b`. These two variables now point to the exact same `int[]` in the Heap. The `=` didn't copy the array; it just took the address from `a` and put it into `b`.

That last line, `b[0] = 100`, does something interesting. When your language sees a dot (`.`) or a bracket (`[`)—also called dereference operators—it checks the address in the variable. Then, it jumps over that location in the Heap and goes to the array or object that's stored over there.

So, `b[0]` jumps the code over to the Heap and checks the first element in the array over there. You then say `b[0] = 100`, which sets that element's value to `100`.

So, the array that `a` points to did change. This is because `a` and `b` now point to the same array in the Heap. A change using one variable shows up in the other variable too.

It's important to remember if you're using a value type (primitives) or a reference type (arrays and objects) in your code.

## Object equality
Typically, when you wanted to see if two variables are equal, you used the `==` operator. However, `==` works on the **_value_** of the variable. It behaves differently depending upon whether the variable is a value type or a reference type.

For value types, `==` checks to see if the two values stored in the variables are the same.

For reference types, `==` checks to see if the two variables hold the same address. This may not be what you want. In fact, it's often not what you want at all.

The following are some examples using strings, which are objects, and therefore, reference types in Java:

```java
String lowerCaseName = new String("java");
String anotherName = lowerCaseName;
lowerCaseName == anotherName;
```

Does `lowerCaseName == anotherName` return true? Yes, it does. Both of those variables hold the same address, so `==` returns true here. What about the following example?

```java
String lowerCaseName = new String("java");
String anotherName = new String("java");
lowerCaseName == anotherName;
```

Now does `lowerCaseName == anotherName` return true? You can see that the two objects contain the same word **_but they aren't the same object_**. So `==` returns false here. Remember, when working with objects, `==` compares the addresses of the objects, and these two variables point to two different objects in memory.

If you don't want to compare addresses but want to compare the **_contents_** of two objects, you need to use something other than `==`. Thankfully, Java has a standard method that lets you do that. If you want to compare two objects to see if they're equivalent, you use the `.equals()` method of the object:

```java
String lowerCaseName = new String("java");
String anotherName = new String("java");
lowerCaseName.equals(anotherName);
```

`.equals()` checks if these two possibly different objects are equivalent. For objects, this is a kind of equivalence you want to check.

>✔ Tip: Ask the right equivalence
>
>For value types (primitives), use the `==` operator to check if two things are equal.

For objects, use the `.equals()` operator to check if two things are equal.

## Null reference
Can you have a reference variable that doesn't reference anything? Recall this code from earlier in this lesson:

```java
int[] numbers;
```

This line of code only completes the first step of the three-step declare-instantiate-initialize creation process. The variable of type `int[]` has been declared, so it exists on the Stack. But `new` hasn't been called, so there's no Heap memory allocated, and therefore no address to store in `numbers`.

So what's in `numbers`? When a reference variable isn't referencing an object, the variable holds the special value `null`. This is also known as a **_null reference_**. You can test whether a variable isn't currently referencing an object using this value:

```java
if (numbers == null) {
    // Tell the user numbers is invalid.
}
```

Likewise, you can assign `null` to any reference variable to "clear" the variable. Suppose your program is done with the array and no longer needs access to it. This code clears the variable and allows the memory to be reused:

```java
// Remove the reference to memory
numbers = null;
```

When a reference variable is null, your code can't de-reference the variable. That is, it can't use the `.` or `[]` operators to access the memory it's pointing to. If you try this, your program receives an error.
