# File system

A **file system** is the way a computer stores files and folders.

All operating systems—like Windows, macOS, and Linux—have file systems. They're an important component in any operating system, and while they may differ from each other in implementation and capabilities, they all share the same basic concept of organizing the raw data recorded on a storage medium into files and folders.

## Files
Files are the basic building blocks of any file system. In general, most users understand that documents, spreadsheets, pictures, and songs are all files, even if they don't always think of them as such.

Files have names and various attributes such as the date and time they were created, a size, and permissions limiting who can access them. You can copy, move, rename, and even delete files.

Filenames also usually contain an **extension**. An extension is typically three or four characters, but can be more, that follow the `.` in a filename. You may already be familiar with some popular extensions like `pdf`, `mp3`, and `jpg`. The filename extension is often used to declare the type of file, and associate that file with a program that opens it by default.

## Folders
Folders, also called directories, are for holding and organizing files. In fact, a file can't exist outside of a folder. All files reside in some folder.

In addition to files, folders may contain other folders, sometimes also called subfolders. The subfolders may hold other files and folders. This is what gives the file system a hierarchical structure.

Like files, folders have names and many of the same attributes as folders. You can copy, move, rename, and delete folders too.

## Special folders
There are many special folders present in all modern file systems. In addition to the built-in folders such as Desktop, Downloads, and Pictures, there are two key folders you'll work with as a programmer.

### Home folder
The home folder is the folder associated with a user's login name where the special folders like Desktop and Downloads reside. Most files and folders a user works with are located here, or in a subfolder of the home folder.

### Root folder
The root folder is the absolute beginning of any file system. It's the base folder that holds all other files and folders.

In macOS and Linux, the root is referred to as `/` and contains files and folders from the hard drive or other storage media.

Under Windows, the root is associated with a drive-letter such as `C:\` or `D:\`. Unlike macOS and Linux, there isn't necessarily a single root in the Windows file system. Other hard drives and storage media get their own drive-letters.

## Paths
A **path** represents the location of a file or folder, including the folders it's contained in. You can think of a path like a set of driving directions to a location like your friend's house. You follow turns into specific folders until you arrive at your destination.

Here are some examples of what a path can look like:
-   `/Users/alice/Documents`
-   `Pictures/vacations/Vegas.jpg`
-   `resources/book.txt`

Directory paths can also end in a `/` like `/Users/alice/Documents/`. That's equivalent to the example in the preceding list.

### Path separator
The file system for Windows uses the backslash (`\`) to separate directories. macOS, Linux, and other Unix-like operating systems use the forward-slash (`/`).

>**🛈 Note: Using forward-slash paths on Windows**
There are tools for Windows that give you a Unix-like command line that uses the forward-slash separator. You'll use one of these tools in this course, so most paths you'll see in this course use the forward-slash pattern.

You'll learn more about this in the next lesson.

### Path types
There are two types of file paths: absolute and relative.

An **absolute** path starts at the root `/` of your file system, for example `/Users/alice/Documents` or `/temp/install-log.txt`.

A **relative** path starts from another location and only contains the part you need to get from there to the file or folder. Using your home directory as a starting point, such examples might be `Documents/receipts` or `Pictures/vacations/Eiffel-Tower.jpg`.

>**✔ Tip: The difference between absolute and relative paths**
>
>Using the analogy of driving directions to your friend's house again, you can think of the two types of paths like such:
>
>- **_Absolute path_** is directions that you can follow from anywhere: "Take the interstate to exit 23, turn right, go 7 miles..."
>-   **_Relative path_** is directions your friend gives you when you call from the gas station across town: "Make a right out of the parking lot, go 2 miles..."
>
>They both get you to the same location, but the directions were different.

### Path aliases
There are some shortcuts you can take when typing a path. These aliases help you save time rather than manually typing out paths to get around the file system:

-   `~` refers to your home directory. Your home directory absolute path could vary based on the operating system, but `~` always refers to your home directory.
    -   For example, `~/Documents/receipts` might refer to `/Users/alice/Documents/receipts`.
-   `..` is an alias that means "up" one directory, sometimes referred to as the _parent_ directory. This is often used in a relative path, to go up one level from the current location.
    -   For example, if you were in `~/Documents/taxes`, then `../receipts` gets you to `~/Documents/receipts`.
    -   You can chain multiple `..` together to go up as many directories as necessary. If you were in `~/Documents/taxes/2021`, then `../../receipts` gets you to `~/Documents/receipts`.
