# Quiz

**File system and command line 1**
Which Bash command displays the path of the current working directory?

Answer: `pwd`

**Explanation:** `pwd` stands for **p**rint **w**orking **d**irectory.

---
**File system and command line 2**
What prints in response to the final command?

```shell
$ pwd
/c/Users/fred/taxes/2021/federal

$ cd ../..

$ pwd
```

Answer: `/c/Users/fred/taxes`

**Explanation:** Starting from `/c/Users/fred/taxes/2021/federal`, the `cd` command moves "up" two folders, and `pwd` prints the current working directory.

---

**File system and command line 3**
Which commands list the contents of the current working directory?

	Select all correct options

□ `pwd`

■ `ls`

□ `pwd .`

□ `ls ..`

□ `pwd -al`

■ `ls .`

**Explanation:** `ls` lists the contents of a folder. The `.` says list the current folder, but that parameter is not necessary. With no parameter, Bash lists the current folder.

---

**File system and command line 4**
Which of the following shell commands changes the working directory to your home directory regardless of your current working directory?

○ `cd home`

○ `cd ..`

○ `cd /`

◉ `cd ~`

○ `cd.`

**Explanation:** `~` is a shortcut that represents the user's home directory.

---

**File system and command line 5**
Which of the following are absolute paths?

	Select all correct options

□ documents

■ /data/documents

□ ../expenses

■ ~/Documents

□ .

**Explanation:** An absolute path leads you to the same location regardless of your current working directory. Both of these paths satisfy that requirement.

---

**File system and command line 6**
You execute the following commands and get these results:

```shell
$ pwd
/c/Users/alexia/Documents/taxes/2021/federal

$ ls -al
total 16
drwxr-xr-x 1 MMorel 197121     0 Nov 17 12:58 ./
drwxr-xr-x 1 MMorel 197121     0 Nov 17 11:46 ../
-rw-r--r-- 1 MMorel 197121 15997 Nov 17 13:00 1040.txt
```

You need to delete the `federal` folder from `2021`. Put the following commands in the proper sequence:

▤ `rm 1040.txt`

▤ `cd ..`

▤ `rmdir federal/`

**Explanation:** You must remove all files from the folder before you delete it. Also, you can't remove a folder you are currently in (your working directory).
