# Boolean expressions

In the previous unit, you learned an expression always evaluates to a single value. Outside of arithmetic expressions, another common expression is a **boolean expression**. This expression always evaluates to `true` or `false`.

There are two common ways that boolean expressions are built:

-   Comparison operators (to compare two values)
-   Logical operators (to create relationships between one or more boolean values)

## Comparison operators
As programmers, when you create applications, you often need to use basic arithmetic comparisons to allow your website visitors to make a choice or present them with different options. For example, you may want to:

-   Calculate if a number is odd or even to create alternating row colors in web pages
-   Validate that there are enough tickets available before allowing a user to reserve a seat for an event
-   Check to see if the user hasn't been to the site within 90 days to show them a reminder

The following comparison operators allow you to make these comparisons.

| Operator | Meaning                  |
| -------- | ------------------------ |
| ==       | Equal To                 |
| !=       | Not Equal To             |
| >        | Greater Than             |
| <        | Less Than                |
| >=       | Greater Than or Equal To |
| <=       | Less Than or Equal To    |

When used in an expression, these comparison operators always evaluate to a boolean `true` or `false` value. For example:

```java
int number = 5;

boolean isItFive = (number == 5);      // true if number is '5'
boolean isItEven = (number % 2) == 0;  // true if number is evenly divisible by '2'
boolean isItNegative = (number < 0);   // true if number is less than but not equal to 0
```

## Logical operators
The comparison operators are limited in their ability to compare values between two different types. When a boolean expression needs to take two or more considerations into account to evaluate a boolean value—for example, is the number negative AND is it even—then the logical operators are used.

The logical operators are AND (`&&`), OR (`||`), XOR (`^`), and NOT (`!`). These operators work with one or more boolean operands to evaluate a boolean expression and yield `true` or `false.`

### NOT `!`
When placed in front of a boolean value, the logical not operator negates the value of the boolean operand.

### AND `&&`
If both of the operands on each side of the `&&` are `true`, the result of the expression is `true`. If one of them is `false`, the result is `false`. Consider the variable called `width` used in the following expression:

```java
(width >= 0.5) && (width <= 5.0)
```

This expression is true if the `width` is between 0.5 and 5.0.

### OR `||`
If either of the operands on each side of the `||` are `true`, then the result of the expression is also `true`. The expression is only `false` when both operands are `false`. For example, consider the variable called `width` used in the following expression:

```java
width < 0.5 || width > 5.0
```

This expression is true if the `width` is less than 0.5 or greater than 5.0.

### XOR `^`
This operator is called exclusive-or. If one operand in the expression is `true` and the other operand is `false`, then the result of the expression is `true`. In an exclusive-or, whenever both operands have the same value, the expression is `false`.

This expression isn't used as often as the logical AND and logical OR.

### Logical operator table
The following table sums up the different logical operators:

| A     | B     | !A    | A && B | A ｜｜ B | A ^ B |
| ----- | ----- | ----- | ------ | -------- | ----- |
| TRUE  | TRUE  | FALSE | TRUE   | TRUE     | FALSE |
| TRUE  | FALSE | FALSE | FALSE  | TRUE     | TRUE  |
| FALSE | TRUE  | TRUE  | FALSE  | TRUE     | TRUE  |
| FALSE | FALSE | TRUE  | FALSE  | FALSE    | FALSE |

Using one of the previous examples, if you wanted to find out if a number was negative AND even, you could write it like this:

```java
int number = 5;

boolean isItEven = (number % 2 == 0);      // true if number is even
boolean isItNegative = (number < 0);       // true if number is less than but not equal to 0

boolean answer = isItEven && isItNegative; // true if isItEven is true and isItNegative is true
```

## Reading complex expressions
In programming, you may encounter many different combinations of comparison and logical operators used in an expression. Boolean expressions can be combined.

Assume two integers, `a` and `b`, are used in the following expression:

```java
int a, b;
boolean output = (a >= 10 && a <= 20) || (b >= 10 && b <= 20);
```

In the previous expression, `output` is only true if `a` or `b` is between 10 and 20. What if you give `a` the value of 8 and `b` the value of 13? Below, you can see how the expression is simplified step-by-step.

First, the values for the variables are replaced within the expressions.

```java
boolean output = (8 >= 10 && 8 <= 20) || (13 >= 10 && 13 <= 20);
```

Next, the following comparison operations are evaluated, simplifying the expression:

-   `8 >= 10` is `false`
-   `8 <= 20` is `true`
-   `13 >= 10` is `true`
-   `13 <= 20` is `true`

```java
boolean output = (false && true) || (true && true);
```

After the comparison operations, the logical expressions are evaluated:

-   `false && true` yields `false`
-   `true && true` yields `true`.

```java
boolean output = (false) || (true);
```

Lastly, `false || true` is evaluated, and the final value is `true`. The complex expression from a few steps back is simplified into:

```java
boolean output = true;
```