# Quiz

1. Logical Branching 1

```java
long x = 10;
long y = x - 4;
boolean answer = y >= 6;
```

Does `answer` evaluate to true or false?

◉ true

○ false

Explanation: The variable `y` is assigned the value of `x - 4` or `10 - 4`, which is `6`. `6` is greater than or equal to `6`.

---

2. Logical Branching 2

```java
int x = 7;
int y = x % 2;
boolean answer = y >= 3;
```

Does `answer` evaluate to true or false?

○ true

◉ false

Explanation: The variable `y` is assigned the value of `x % 2` or `7 % 2`, which is `1`. `1` isn't greater than or equal to `3`.

---

3. Logical Branching 3

```java
int x = 10;
int y = 20;
boolean answer = !(x > y);
```

Does `answer` evaluate to true or false?

◉ true

○ false

Explanation: `10` isn't greater than `20`, so `x > y` evaluates to `false`. The `!` outside the parenthesis negates the value inside, so `answer` becomes `true`.

---

4. Logical Branching 4

```java
int x = 5;
int y = 8;
int z = 15;

boolean answer = (x > y) || (z % x == 0);
```

Does `answer` evaluate to true or false?

◉ true

○ false

Explanation: The `x > y` expression evaluates to `false` because `5` isn't greater than `8`. The `z % x == 0` expression evaluates to `true` because `z % x` is equal to `0`. The `||` is a logical OR which evaluates two expressions and is `true` if either side is equal to `true`.

---

5. Logical Branching 5

```java
int sum = 14;

if (sum < 20) {
   System.out.println("Under");
}
else {
   System.out.println("Over");
}

System.out.println("the limit");
```

What does this code display?

○ Under

○ Over

◉ Under the limit

○ Under Over the limit

○ the limit

Explanation: "Under" prints because `14` is less than `20`. The `else` block doesn't run because the `if` condition is `true`. "the limit" prints regardless of the if/else before it.

---

6. Logical Branching 6

```java
boolean p = true;
boolean q = false;

if (p && q) {
     System.out.println("Apple");
} else {
     System.out.println("Orange");
}
```

What does this code display?

○ Apple

◉ Orange

Explanation: The expression `p && q` evaluates to `false` because the `&&` is a logical AND which evaluates two expressions and is `true` only if both sides are equal to `true`. `q` is `false`, so the expression is `false`. Because the condition of the `if` statement is `false`, the `else` block runs.

---

7. Logical Branching 7

```java
boolean p = true;
boolean q = true;

if (!p || !q) {
     System.out.println("Apple");
} else if (p ^ q) {
     System.out.println("Orange");
} else {
     System.out.println("Banana");
}
```

What does this code display?

○ Appe

○ Orange

◉ Banana

Explanation: The expression `!p || !q` evaluates to `false` because the `||` is a logical OR which evaluates two expressions and is `true` if either side is equal to `true`. `p` and `q` are `true`, but the `!` negates each, so the expression evaluates as `false || false`, which is `false`. The expression `p ^ q` is also `false`, because the `^` is a logical XOR, or exclusive-or, which evaluates two expressions and is `true` if only one side is `true` and the other is `false`. Because both `p` and `q` are `true`, the expression evaluates as `false`. Because neither `!p || !q` or `p ^ q` is `true`, the `else` block runs.

---

8. Logical Branching 8

```java
int x = 6;
int y = -2;

if (y < 0) {
    // Is the x variable accessible here?
}
```

Is the `x` variable accessible at the location of the comment?

◉ Yes

○ No

Explanation: The `x` variable is accessible inside the `if` block because it's declared outside of it.

---

9. Logical Branching 9

```java
int x = 6;
int y = -2;

if (y < 0) {
    int z = x * y;
}

// Is the y variable accessible here?
```

Is the `y` variable accessible at the location of the comment?

◉ Yes

○ No

Explanation: The `y` variable is accessible after the `if` block because it's the same scope as where it's declared.

---

10. Logical Branching 10

```java
int x = 6;
int y = -2;

if (y < 0) {
    int z = x * y;
}

// Is the z variable accessible here?
```

Is the `z` variable accessible at the location of the comment?

○ Yes

◉ No

Explanation: The `z` variable isn't accessible outside the `if` block because variables are only in scope inside the block where they're declared.