# Introduction to Git

## Git
One of the most widely used version control systems in the world today is Git. You can find it at the core of most open source projects and in many different organizations. Almost all Integrated Development Environments (IDEs), the software that developers use to write and test their code, offer built-in integration with Git.

> Git is a version control system for tracking changes in computer files and coordinating work on those files among multiple people. Developers primarily use Git for source code management in software development. You can also use it to keep track of changes in any set of files.
> 
> — _[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Git)_

Git is software that you install and run on your development computer. Once you start using Git on your computer, all of the changes you make to your code are tracked and saved in a local database, or **repository**.

Using Git to track and save versions of your code on your computer is great, but it still poses some issues. If your hard drive crashes, you could lose all of your data. And if you're working on a project with other developers, Git alone offers no way to share your code with the team.

## GitHub, Bitbucket, and GitLab
GitHub, Bitbucket, and GitLab are a few services known as **remote repository hosts**. These websites store your Git data in the cloud so it's safe and backed up, and it can be shared across a team.

You transfer data from your local computer to the remote host—for example, GitHub—by _pushing your changes_ to it. You can download new code from a remote repository, like code that a teammate wrote, by _pulling the changes_ onto your computer.

Together, Git and a remote hosting service provide everything a team needs to safely manage its code.