# Data types

Every variable, when created, is defined with a data type. A data type classifies the variable and indicates the type of data that a particular variable holds.

In Java, there are two classifications of data types: primitive data types and reference data types. A primitive data type stores a value like `42`, `true`, or `a`, that consumes a fixed amount of memory. A reference type stores complex data, such as an address book.

## Common data types
Here is a list of the eight primitive data types supported by the Java language:

| Data Type | Range                                               |
| --------- | --------------------------------------------------- |
| boolean   | true or false                                       |
| byte      | -128 to 127 or -2^7 to 2^7 -1                       |
| short     | -32,768 to 32,767 or -2^15 to 2^15 -1               |
| int       | -2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647 or -2^31 to 2^31 -1 |
| long      | -2^63 to 2^63 -1                                    |
| float     | -3.4 x 10^38 to 3.5 x 10^38                         |
| double    | -1.798 x 10^308 to 1.798 x 10^308                   |
| char      | \u0000 to \uffff ('a', 'b', etc.)                   |

Many of these data types store similar types of data, such as integer, boolean, and floating point. Their difference is in the ranges of values they hold. For example:

-   `int` and `long` both store integers, but `long` can hold significantly larger numbers.
-   `float` and `double` both store decimal points, but `double` offers higher precision.

## Numeric imprecision
There is an infinite number of numeric values, but each primitive data type has a finite number of bits for storing those values. This means primitive data types can't represent every possible number.

For whole numbers like an `int` or `long`, the numbers that can't be represented are those outside the range of possible values for that type.

However, for numbers with a decimal part like a `float` or `double`, the situation is more complex. Not only is there an infinite number of values like `1.0` and `2.0`, but there is also an infinite number of values _between_ them like `1.1`, `1.01`, `1.001`, etc.

Having only a finite number of bits to store these decimal values makes them "imprecise." They're not accurate beyond a certain decimal place. Even though the amount of imprecision may be very small, you must not expect precise results from calculations using imprecise data types in your programs.

For example, adding the `double` values `0.1` and `0.2` results in the value `0.30000000000000004` which is imprecise. It's accurate to 16 decimal places, but the seventeenth place is inaccurate. This could lead to various problems, some of which you can avoid by careful rounding.

However, when numeric precision is critical, you should use a non-primitive, precise data type rather than a `float` or `double`. You'll learn about those data types later.

## Note: String data type
Another common data type is `String`, which is used to store text like `char`, but can be used for more than one character. It isn't a primitive type, so `String` isn't in the list earlier. However, `String` can often be used like a primitive type due to special support in the Java language. You'll learn more details about `String`s later in this course.

For a reference of all Java primitive types, view the [Java Docs](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/nutsandbolts/datatypes.html) .