# Declaring and using variables

## Declaring a variable
Before using a variable, you must first declare it. The declaration statement for a variable is `data-type identifier;`.

The following code sample shows how to declare several variables:

```java
int numberOfPeople;             // declare an integer called numberOfPeople
double gallonsOfGas;            // declare a double called gallonsOfGas
boolean isRaining;              // declare a boolean called isRaining
char firstLetter;               // declare a char called firstLetter
```

Once you declare a variable within a given scope, you can't declare it again. The following code creates a compilation error:

```java
{
    int numberOfPeople;     // legal

    // ...

    int numberOfPeople;     // numberOfPeople is already in scope and can't be declared again
}
```

## Naming variables
To begin, there are a few Java-specific rules:

-   Variable names must begin with a letter, the dollar sign `$`, or the underscore character `_`. Subsequent characters may be letters, digits, dollar signs, or underscores.
-   Variable names may not be Java keywords, such as `for`, `int`, or `return`. For the complete list of keywords, see [Java Language Keywords](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/nutsandbolts/_keywords.html) .
-   Variable names are case-sensitive and unlimited in length.

Besides the Java-specific rules, there are many programming conventions. Code that has complex variable names or confusing abbreviations isn't well-received in the developer community. Keeping your variable names clear and consistent benefits your colleagues _and_ yourself. There's a chance you won't remember what you meant while fixing an error in production on a codebase you worked on over a year ago.

While variable naming is an art, when it comes to creating names, there are some best practices:

-   Follow camel-casing conventions: the first word is lowercase, and subsequent words have the first letter capitalized.
-   Use pronounceable names for variables.
-   Use names over single characters.
-   Avoid creating multiple variables that are variations of the same name, as this creates confusion.
-   Use names that describe _what_ the variable does, not _how_ it does it.
-   With booleans, use names that start with is, has, was, and so on. Avoid using a double negative.

**Good Variable Names**

-   `numberOfStudents` for an int
-   `averageCostOfGas` for a double
-   `isAvailable` for a boolean

**Not Good Variable Names**

-   `nbr`
-   `name` followed by `name2`, `name3`, etc.
-   `numberOfStudents` followed by `number_of_students_`

Giving your variables meaningful names is one of the golden rules of programming. Names that clearly describe what the variable does or what information the variable holds will help make your code more readable.

## Assigning values to variables
After you've declared a variable, you can assign it a value. You can assign three different types of values to variables:

-   Literal values, like `42`, `true`, or `a`, depending on the data type
-   Variable values where the value of one variable is given to the value of another variable
-   Evaluated values from an _expression_

You use the assignment operator `=` when giving a value in an assignment statement. In the following code sample, the four variables declared earlier are assigned values:

```java
int numberOfPeople;             // declare an integer called numberOfPeople
double gallonsOfGas;            // declare a double called gallonsOfGas
boolean isRaining;              // declare a boolean called isRaining
boolean isCloudy;               // declare a boolean called isCloudy
char firstLetter;               // declare a char called firstLetter

numberOfPeople = 16;            // assign the integer 16 to the numberOfPeople variable
gallonsOfGas = 3.26;            // assign the double 3.26 to the gallonsOfGas variable
isRaining = true;               // assign the boolean true to the isRaining variable
firstLetter = 'a';              // assign the character 'a' to the firstLetter variable

isCloudy = isRaining;           // copy the value from isRaining into the isCloudy variable
```

If the variable appears on the right-hand side of the operator, then its value is retrieved and copied into the variable on the left-hand side of the operator.

## Tip: Reading code
When reading code, it might help to read the right-hand side of the assignment statement first. Once you've determined what value will be used, use the `=` to indicate you are assigning a value to the variable on the left-hand side.

You may often see variables declared _and_ assigned within the same line of code.

```java
int numberOfPeople = 16;
double gallonsOfGas = 3.26;
boolean isRaining = true;
```

_Remember that there is a difference between declaring and assigning a value_.