# Expressions

You now know a couple ways to assign values to a variable: use literals and other variables. Another way to assign values to a variable is to use an expression. Expressions are combinations of values, variables, and operators that are evaluated and produce a single result, which can then be used in a statement.

An example that you may be familiar with could be this:

```java
200 / 10
```

You know that this arithmetic expression yields a single value: 20. In a program, it could be used in a similar way:

```java
// (200 / 10) is evaluated to 20 which is then saved into the variable.
int milesPerGallon = 200 / 10;
```

The expression on the right side of the `=` assignment operator is fully evaluated to arrive at a single value. Then that value is assigned to the variable that appears to the left of the `=`.

As you continue reading, you'll see many forms of expressions. Next, you'll learn how to use arithmetic expressions with variables in programs.

## Arithmetic expressions
There is usually a need for basic calculations when your programs run. To do that, you have access to the following arithmetic operators.

In the following table, assume A is equal to 15 and B is equal to 2:

| Operator | Description                        | Example    |
| -------- | ---------------------------------- | ---------- |
| +        | Adds two operands                  | A + B = 17 |
| -        | Subtracts two operands             | A - B = 13 |
| *        | Multiplies two operands            | A * B = 30 |
| /        | Divides two operands               | A / B = 7  |
| %        | Finds the remainder after division | A % B = 1  |

### Remainder operator
In the table, one operator you may not have seen before is the **remainder** operator ( `%` ). The result of this operation is the _remainder_ after integer division. In the example, if the values `15` and `2` are divided, the integer result is `7`, _with a remainder of `1`_. This value of `1` is the result of the remainder operation, `15 % 7`.

## Note: Other names for the remainder operator
In other programming languages and generally in computing, the remainder operator may be referred to as the _modulo_ or _modulus_ operator. The [Java specification](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se11/html/jls-15.html#jls-15.17.3) calls it _remainder_, but you should know that if someone says "modulo", "modulus" or even "mod", they're referring to this operator.

## Compound expressions
The Java programming language allows you to construct compound expressions by combining various smaller expressions. Here's an example of a compound expression:

```java
int result = 2 * 3 * 4;
```

In this example, the order in which the expression is evaluated is unimportant because the result of multiplication is independent of order. `2 * 3` equals `6`, and that result is multiplied by `4`. That expression, `6 * 4`, equals `24`. Likewise, if the second part of the expression is calculated first, `3 * 4` equals `12`, and that result is multiplied by `2`. That expression, `2 * 12`, also equals `24`.

However, in some expressions, the order of evaluation _does_ matter. For example:

```java
2 + 3 * 4
```

That compound expression gives different results, depending on whether you perform the addition or the multiplication operation first. `2 + 3` equals `5`, and `5 * 4` equals `20`. Alternatively, `3 * 4` equals `12`, and `2 + 12` equals `14`.

You can specify exactly how an expression is evaluated using parentheses: `( )`. For example, to make the previous expression unambiguous, you could write the following:

```java
result = (2 + 3) * 4;
```

In this case, the addition operation is performed, and then the result is used in the multiplication operation.

## Operator precedence
If you don't explicitly indicate the order of the operations to be performed, the order is determined by the _precedence_ of each operator used in the expression. Operators that have a higher precedence are evaluated first. For example, the multiplication operator has a higher precedence than the addition operator. Therefore, the following two statements are equivalent:

```java
result = 2 + 3 * 4     // order determined by operator precedence
result = 2 + (3 * 4)   // order explicitly defined by parentheses
```

The arithmetic operators `*`, `/`, and `%` all have _higher_ precedence than `+` and `-`. In statements with operators of equal precedence, like `*` and `/`, the expressions are evaluated left-to-right.

## Tip: Use parentheses for readability
When writing compound expressions, be explicit and indicate with parentheses which operators you want evaluated first with parentheses. This practice makes code easier to read and to maintain.

## Example
The following code sample demonstrates arithmetic operations in the context of several simple expressions and a complex expression:

```java
int a = 15;
int b = 2;
int result;

result = a + b;     // expression is evaluated to 17 and copied into result
result = a - b;     // expression is evaluated to 13 and copied into result
result = a * b;     // expression is evaluated to 30 and copied into result
result = a / b;     // expression is evaluated to 7 and copied into result
result = a % b;     // expression is evaluated to 1 and copied into result

// In the following statement, a is multiplied by b first. The output is divided
// by the current value of the result variable. This final value is assigned
// into the result value.
result = (a * b) / result;

// Translates to
// result = (15 * 2) / result;
// result = 30 / result;
// result = 30 / 1;
// result = 30;
```

## Note: String concatenation
**String concatenation** is the operation of joining two or more strings. For example, the concatenation of `"snow"` and `"ball"` is `"snowball"`.

Concatenation uses the plus sign like adding two numbers together:

```java
String stringOne = "Hello "; // note the space
String stringTwo = "World!";
String stringThree = stringOne + stringTwo; // stringThree will be "Hello World!"
```