# Type conversion

The numeric data types of Java—like `int`, `long`, and `double`—each have a [range of possible values](https://lms.techelevator.com/cohorts/42/blocks/7/content_files/01_Variables_Data_Types/02-data-types.md#common-data-types). Many values can be expressed as more than one type. For example, the value 23 can be expressed as an `int`, a `long`, or even a `float`. However, you can't use a `long` when the code you're working with requires an `int`.

Most programming languages, including Java, provide the capability to convert a value from one type to another. This is called **type conversion** or **type casting**.

There are two types of conversion operations—widening and narrowing:

-   **Widening** means converting a smaller data type, like `int`, to a larger data type, such as `long`.
-   **Narrowing** means converting a larger data type, like `long`, to a smaller data type, such as `int`.

## Widening
A `long` has a larger range of values than an `int` does, so any `int` value can be used in a `long`. Similarly, `double` has a larger range of values than `float`, so any `float` can be used in a `double`. These are considered **widening** operations.

The Java numeric data types are widened in the following order:

```java
byte > short > int > long > float > double
```

Widening conversions happen _implicitly_. In other words, the conversion happens automatically. You assign the smaller data type value to the larger data type:

```java
short shortValue = 23;
long longValue = shortValue;
```

## Narrowing
The opposite of a widening conversion is a **narrowing** conversion. Narrowing conversions occur when you assign a larger data type value to a smaller data type value—for example, assigning a `long` value to an `int`.

The Java numeric data types can be narrowed in the reverse order of widening conversions:

```java
double > float > long > int > short > byte
```

Narrowing conversions happen _explicitly_. That means you need to write code to convert a value. To convert a value, you use this syntax:

```java
(dataTypeToConvertTo)valueToConvert;
```

For example, converting a `long` to a `short` looks like this:

```java
long longValue = 23;
short shortValue = (short)longValue;
```

If you don't use that format for a narrowing conversion, your code won't compile. Instead, the compiler returns an error message about a possible loss of value:

```
error: incompatible types: possible lossy conversion from long to short
```

### Loss of value - overflow
If you convert a larger value to a smaller data type—even with explicit conversion—there might be an issue if the value is too big for the data type.

Recall that the data type `byte` can only handle values between `-128` and `127`. What happens if you try to cast a value too large for it?

```java
int intValue = 132;
byte byteValue = (byte)intValue;
```

After running this code, `byteValue` has a value of `-124`. What happened here?

This is called an **overflow**. When a data type overflows, it "rolls over" to the minimum value, and the remainder value is added to it. This is the "possible lossy conversion" that the compiler warns about.

Imagine `intValue` is `126`, is incremented by `1` six times, and converted to a `byte` after each increment. This table shows the value of `intValue` and `byteValue` at each step:

| intValue | byteValue |
| -------- | --------- |
| 126      | 126       |
| 127      | 127       |
| 128      | -128      |
| 129      | -127      |
| 130      | -126      |
| 131      | -125      |
| 132      | -124      |

After `byteValue` is `127`, its next incremented value is `-128` because it rolled over to its minimum value, and then begins incrementing from there.

### Loss of value - truncation
You can also experience a loss of value if you convert from a decimal value, like `float` or `double`, to an integer value, like `int` or `long`:

```
double doubleValue = 99.9;
int intValue = (int)doubleValue;
```

After running this code, `intValue` has a value of `99`. Notice that it's not `100`. Converting to an integer value drops the numbers after the decimal point, and it doesn't round the value to the nearest integer.

However, if you convert from a `double` that has more decimal places than a `float` can handle, it _does_ round the `float` value:

```java
double doubleValue = 99.99999;
float floatValue = (float)doubleValue;
// floatValue is 99.99999

doubleValue = 99.999999; // one additional decimal place
floatValue = (float)doubleValue;
// floatValue is 100
```

## Inferring data types
One final point to know about type conversion occurs when you perform arithmetic between two data types. Depending on the data types used in your math, you may end up with a different value than expected.

Imagine you have a program that calculates the average of test scores:

```java
int score1 = 85;
int score2 = 93;
int score3 = 75;
int score4 = 90;
int sum = score1 + score2 + score3 + score4;
// sum is 343
```

An average is calculated by adding all the values together and dividing that by the number of values. The average test score is 343 divided by 4, or 85.75.

If you divide the integer `343` by the integer `4`, you get `85.0`:

```java
double averageScore = sum / 4;
// averageScore is 85.0
```

This is because the compiler uses the data types on the right-hand side to determine the value to assign, even though it's being assigned to a `double`. It truncated the decimal value and converted it to an integer because the expression contained only integers.

If you performed that same calculation with the `double` value of `4.0`, you'll receive the correct average:

```java
double averageScore = sum / 4.0;
// averageScore is 85.75
```

You can also convert the `4` to a `double` for the same result:

```java
double averageScore = sum / (double)4;
// averageScore is 85.75
```

In both of the examples, the `double` value on the right-hand side causes the compiler to correctly return a `double` value.

## Literal suffixes
Literal values in Java have default data types. A literal number without a decimal part is an `int`, and a literal number with a decimal part is a `double`. For example:

```java
daysInWeek = 7; // 7 is an int
milesInMarathon = 26.2; // 26.2 is a double
```

To make a literal number a `float` or a `long`, add a **literal suffix**. The suffix `F` makes the number a `float`, and the suffix `L` makes the number a `long`. For example:

```java
normalTemp = 98.6F; // 98.6 is a float
populationIn2020 = 7800000000L; // 7,800,000,000 is a long
```

Lowercase `f` and `l` are also valid, but avoid `l` because it looks like the number one.

Use literal suffixes to avoid compiler errors due to the default data types. For example:

```java
//float f = 3.26;  // won't compile because a float variable can't contain a double value
float f = 3.26F;   // adding F makes 3.26 a float value

//long total = 5000000000;  // won't compile because 5 billion is too large to be an int
long total = 5000000000L;   // adding L makes 5 billion a long value
```