# Quiz

1. Variables and Data Types 1
Which of the following variable names is invalid?

○ `my5BestBooks`

○ `returnAmount`

◉ `67count`

○ `_MAX_NUMBER_OF_MONKEYS_`

Explanation: `67count` is invalid. Variable names may not begin with a digit.

---

2. Variables and Data Types 2
Which of the following best conforms to Java variable naming conventions for a boolean variable?

○ `is_project_completed`

○ `projectCompleted`

○ `isPrcjtCmpltd`

◉ `isProjectCompleted`

Explanation: `isProjectCompleted` begins with `is` and follows the _camelCase_ standard.

---

3. Variables and Data Types 3

```java
int x = 5;
int y = x + 2;
y = 3;
```

What's the value of the variable `y` after this code snippet executes?

Answer: `3`

---

4. Variables and Data Types 4

```java
double x = 7 / 4;
```

What's the value of the variable `x` after this code snippet executes?

Answer: `1`

---

5. Variables and Data Types 5

```java
double x = (5 / 2) * 4;
```

What's the value of the variable `x` after this code snippet executes?

Answer: `8`

---

6. Variables and Data Types 6
What definition is most appropriate for a variable that contains the number of pencils in a pencil box?

○ `char numberOfPencils;`

○ `float numberOfPencils;`

◉ `int numberOfPencils;`

○ `boolean numberOfPencils;`

Explanation: The number of pencils is a whole number value, `int` is the most appropriate data type.

---

7. Variables and Data Types 7

```java
int x = (int)((5 / (double)2) * 4);
```

What's the value of the variable `x` after this code snippet executes?

Answer: `10`

---

8. Variables and Data Types 8

```java
int x =  9 + 5 / 2 * 4 - 3;
```

What's the value of the variable `x` after this code snippet executes?

Answer: `14`

---

9. Variables and Data Types 9
Write a constant variable definition for pi, and assign it a value of 3.14.

Answer: `final double PI = 3.14;`

---

10. Variables and Data Types 10

```java
int x = 38 % 3;
```

What's the value of the variable `x` after this code snippet executes?

○ 8

○ 12

◉ 2

○ 0

Explanation: The mod or modulus operator `%` returns the remainder of the division of the two numbers. 38 divided by 3 is 12 with a remainder of 2.