# Requests with code

As with `GET` requests, you can use `RestTemplate` to perform `POST`, `PUT`, and `DELETE` requests. Similar to how you used `.getForObject()` for `GET` requests, there are corresponding `.postForObject()`, `.put()`, and `.delete()` methods.

To make a `POST` or `PUT` request, you'll often need to submit data as well. With `RestTemplate`, you can submit that data as an object, and `RestTemplate` automatically serializes it into a format that the server can read.

>**🛈 Note: What does serialize mean?**
>
>**Serialize** means converting an object into a string. It's the opposite of the term "deserialize", which you learned in the last unit.

## POST requests

The syntax for making a `POST` request with an object is similar to the syntax for making a `GET` request with type parameters. With `POST` requests, there's one additional step: attaching the data to the request.

In the following example, you create a new `User` object and add it to the request using an `HttpEntity`, which combines the `User` object with the HTTP header `Content-Type=application/json`:

```java
User newUser = new User();
User.setFirstName("Fred");
User.setLastName("Smith");
User.setEmail("fred@example.com");

// Create instance of RestTemplate
RestTemplate restTemplate = new RestTemplate();

// Create instance of HttpHeaders and set Content-Type to application/json
HttpHeaders headers = new HttpHeaders();
headers.setContentType(MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON);

// Combine headers with new user object to form HttpEntity
HttpEntity<User> entity = new HttpEntity<>(newUser, headers);

// Post (add) the new user using the entity.
newUser = restTemplate.postForObject(API_URL + "users", entity, User.class);
```

It's important to note the third parameter in the method call, `restTemplate.postForObject(..., ..., User.class)`. The `postForObject()` method returns the newly posted object and uses the third parameter as a template to _deserialize_ the returned JSON. In this case, since a `User` object was posted, you'd expect the returned object to be of type `User`, so the method is passed the `User.class` as the template.

>**🛈 Note: About .class**
>
>A class name, like `User` followed by `.class`, is called a **class literal** in Java. It's a way to programmatically refer to the underlying structure of a class so that the serializer or deserializer can map JSON values to the corresponding object attributes.

## PUT requests

A `PUT` request is like a `POST` request, but you use the `.put()` method instead. You also still need to combine the `Content-Type=application/json` header with the object using an `HttpEntity`. However, you don't need to use the type parameter as you won't usually receive any data from a `PUT` request:

```java
User existingUser = new User();
existingUser.setFirstName("Fredrick");
existingUser.setLastName("Smith");
existingUser.setEmail("fred@example.com");

// Create instance of RestTemplate
RestTemplate restTemplate = new RestTemplate();

// Create instance of HttpHeaders and set Content-Type to application/json
HttpHeaders headers = new HttpHeaders();
headers.setContentType(MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON);

// Combine headers with existing user object to form HttpEntity
HttpEntity<User> entity = new HttpEntity<>(existingUser, headers);

// Put (update) the existing user using the entity.
restTemplate.put(API_URL + "users/23", entity);
```

Notice that the URL in this example has `23` at the end of it. A `PUT` method updates existing data, and typically a unique identifier, such as a numerical ID, is in the URL to identify the object that you want to update.

### PUT requests replace data

When performing a `PUT` request, you're usually expected to send the _entire object_, including parts that you haven't modified. This is because the server often _replaces_ the entire object or record with the data supplied. This behavior is mainly due to the [HTTP standard](https://httpwg.org/specs/rfc7231.html#PUT) , which states that a `PUT` request creates or replaces the existing data with the data that's sent.

It's up to the API developer to decide to follow the standard or not. As stated before, following the standard is best practice and indicates to other developers how the data changes on the server.

This behavior also explains why `.put()` doesn't return the updated object like `.postForObject()`. Since `.put()` assumes that the server _replaces_ the object or record with the data supplied, there's no need to return the updated data since it's identical.

## DELETE requests

`DELETE` requests usually only require the ID, like `PUT` requests, but they don't require any additional data. You also don't need to use the type parameter as you won't usually receive any data from a `DELETE` request:

```java
RestTemplate restTemplate = new RestTemplate();
restTemplate.delete(API_URL + "users/23");
```