# Quiz

## **DAO Pattern 1**

**Put the Java data access layers in order from highest to lowest.**

▤ Spring JDBC

▤ JDBC

▤ JDBC Driver

▤ Database

**Explanation:** `Spring JDBC` is the highest layer. It contains the two sub-component layers, `JDBC` and `JDBC Driver`. `Spring JDBC` encapsulates and abstracts-away many of the lower-level details of `JDBC` and allows you to concentrate on the application.  
  
`JDBC` manages the low-level details of communication between Java and the database, and sits between `Spring JDBC` and the `JDBC Driver`.  
  
The `JDBC Driver` performs the actual transfer of requests and responses to-and-from the database. Each driver is with a specific database.  
  
`Database` is the lowest layer.


## **DAO Pattern 2**

**The Java language doesn't come with an implementation of the `DataSource` interface.**

◉ True

○ False

**Explanation:** True, the Java language does **_not_** come with its own implementation of the `DataSource` interface. The Apache `BasicDataSource` implementation is commonly used.


## **DAO Pattern 3**

**Which of the following classes is provided by Spring JDBC for executing SQL statements and returning results?**

○ `PreparedStatement`

○ `Statement`

◉ `JdbcTemplate`

○ `SqlRowSet`

**Explanation:** Spring JDBC's `JdbcTemplate` simplifies programming JDBC and offers several methods for submitting SQL statements.


## **DAO Pattern 4**

**What value would be inserted into the `last_name` column by the following code snippet?**

```java
JdbcTemplate jdbcTemplate = new JdbcTemplate(dataSource);

String sqlCreatePerson = 
    "INSERT INTO person(middle_name, last_name, first_name) VALUES (?, ?, ?)";

jdbcTemplate.update(sqlCreatePerson, "Stevie", "Ray", "Vaughan");
```

○ Stevie

◉ Ray

○ Vaughan

○ Stevie Ray Vaughan

**Explanation:** `"Ray"` is the second prepared statement value passed into the call to `update()` and is consequently associated with the second placeholder `last_name` column of the `INSERT` SQL statement.


## **DAO Pattern 5**

**The database username and password are required in the connection string.**

○ True

◉ False

**Explanation:** The database username and password are _not_ required in the connection string. They're set on the DataSource using the `setUsername()` and `setPassword()` methods. And in fact, adding them to the connection string is a serious breach of security.


## **DAO Pattern 6**

**Assuming an `employee` table with the following columns:**

| **Name**    | **Type** |
| ----------- | -------- |
| employee_id | SERIAL   |
| firstname   | VARCHAR  |
| lastname    | VARCHAR  |
| date_hired  | DATE     |
| hourly      | BOOLEAN  |

**8**

```java
public class Employee {

    // Instance variables
    private String employeeID;
    private String fullname;
    private LocalDate dateHired;
    private boolean hourly;

    // Assume appropriate getters and setters

}
```

	Select all correct options

■ `String employeeId`

■ `String fullname`

□ `LocalDate dateHired`

□ `boolean hourly`

□ There are no incorrect instance variables

**Explanation:** `String` is an inappropriate Java type for SQL `employee_id SERIAL`.  
  
There is no `fullname` SQL column. Multiple SQL columns such as `firstname` and `lastname` should be kept as separate instance variables in the Java class.


## **DAO Pattern 7**

**What are the features of object-oriented programming that the DAO Pattern relies upon?**

	Select all correct options

■ Polymorphism

□ Inheritance

■ Encapsulation

□ Abstraction

**Explanation:** The DAO interface layer is the polymorphic expression of its capabilities, while the data source implementation of the interface encapsulates the state and behaviors of the specific data sources.


## **DAO Pattern 8**

**Put the following steps for submitting SQL using Spring JDBC in the correct order.**

▤ Create `DataSource`

▤ Bind `DataSource` to `JdbcTemplate`

▤ Assign SQL statement to a `String` variable

▤ Submit SQL `String` using `JdbcTemplate`

▤ Handle values returned by submission

**Explanation:** The `DataSource` must first be created and then bound to the `JDBCTemplate.<br><br> The SQL statement string is optionally assigned to a separate` String`variable, and then passed to the`JDBCTemplate`,or the SQL statement string may passed directly as a` String`literal to`JDBCTemplate`.  
  
Once the SQL statement has been submitted, the returned values are handled.


## **DAO Pattern 9**

**Assuming an `employee` table with the following columns:**

| **Name**    | **Type** |
| ----------- | -------- |
| employee_id | SERIAL   |
| firstname   | VARCHAR  |
| lastname    | VARCHAR  |
| date_hired  | DATE     |
| hourly      | BOOLEAN  |

**What's the correct way to pull out the value of `lastname` column from a returned `SqlRowSet` named `results`?**

○ `results.pullString("lastname")`

○ `results.getVarChar("lastname")`

◉ `results.getString("lastname")`

○ `results.pullVarChar("lastname")`

**Explanation:** `results.getString("lastname")` retrieves the value from the `lastname` column and passes it as a argument to `getString()` which converts the column `VARCHAR` value to a Java `String`.


## **DAO Pattern 10**

**Typically you use a `while` to handle a `SqlRowSet` containing multiple rows.**

```java
while (results.next()) {
    // Handle a row from the SqlRowSet
}
```

**Select reasons why you may want to use an `if` or `if-else` instead.**

	Select all correct options

■ Handle the first row only

□ Include additional conditions to boolean expression

■ Test at least one row returned

■ Special processing if zero rows returned

**Explanation:** **Handle the first row only** regardless of how many rows were returned as long as there was at least one.  
**Test at least one row returned** is similar to handling the first row only in that it guarantees at least one row was returned.  
**Special processing if zero rows returned** can be handled within the `else` of an `if-else`.

```java
if (results.next()) {
    // Handle only the first row, confirmed at least one row returned.
}
else {
    // No rows returned, perform desired special processing such throwing exception, displaying message, etc.
}
```
