# Introduction

JavaScript is a general-purpose programming language originally intended as a way to bring dynamic behavior to the static content of HTML. JavaScript has evolved considerably from its earliest days and is now used in ways not thought of back in the mid-1990s. From the beginning, JavaScript was designed to be a quickly learned, forgiving language that was approachable for beginners.

Quickly adopted by the European community and standardized under the name, "ECMAScript", JavaScript has migrated beyond its traditional place in the browser. Now, you can find JavaScript in backend applications using NodeJS, embedded in innumerable IoT projects around the world, and used as a sort of universal "glue" which binds together applications with bits and pieces of code.

---

# Variables

You'll already be familiar with variables from your work in Java or C#, so some of the following may feel repetitious, but a brief refresher doesn't hurt. Also, there are differences that are unique to JavaScript.

## Variable names

Programming languages tend to be particular when it comes to naming things, and JavaScript is no exception. There are certain rules that you must follow to satisfy JavaScript when naming variables.

### Naming rules for JavaScript variables

-   Variable names consist of letters `A-Z`, `a-z`, characters `_`, `$`, and digits `0-9`.
-   Variable names must start with a letter, `_`, or `$`.
-   Variable names are case-sensitive.
-   Variable names may not be a reserved keyword.

The following are considered best practices in JavaScript:

-   Use camelCase for multi-word variable names.
-   Use uppercase for constants and separate words with an underscore, `_`.
-   Boolean variable names should begin with `is`.

#### Good variable names

| **Name of variable** | **Reason**                                                          |
| -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `result`             | Simple, single word                                                 |
| `firstName`          | Appropriate use of camelCase                                        |
| `isComplete`         | `isComplete` is a boolean, so it follows boolean naming conventions |
| `PI`                 | Pi is a universal constant; uses all uppercase letters              |
| `__grandTotal__`     | Special characters can help make names unique                       |

#### Not good variable names

| **Name of variable** | **Reason**                                                                                |
| -------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `q`                  | Longer variable names are usually preferable to single characters                         |
| `case`               | Invalid; case is a reserved word in JavaScript                                            |
| `2many`              | Invalid; names may not begin with a digit                                                 |
| `max_monkeys`        | Doesn't follow camelCase best practice                                                    |
| `BuildingBlock`      | Doesn't follow the camelCase best practice                                                |
| `notExcludedChars`   | Double negatives hurt to read and understand; perhaps includedCharacters is a better name |
| `helpMe!`            | Invalid; _ and $ are the only special characters allowed in names                         |

## Declaring variables

Now that you know how to name your variables, you can create some. To create a variable, you need to declare it.

There are two ways to declare a variable in JavaScript. In either case, the basic form is the reserved words, `let`, or `const`, a variable name, and a semi-colon, `;`.

>**⚠ Danger: Avoid using var**
>
>In previous versions of JavaScript, programmers routinely used the `var` reserved word to declare variables. This reserved word, and an even earlier method of declaring a variable by assigning a value to it, are still available in the language to run older, legacy code, _but neither should be used in new code_. Stick with `let` and `const`.

### Using let

You use `let` when you know the value of the variable needs to be changeable. This is its basic form:

```js
// Declare without initializing
let myChangeableValueVariableName;
// Declare and initialize
let firstName = 'Bernice';
```

While you're only required to use `let` followed by a variable name, you may assign a value to any variable while you're declaring it.

>**🛈 Note: Writing JavaScript comments**
>
>Line comments in JavaScript begin with `//`. They work the same way as line comments in Java and C#.

JavaScript also supports "block" comments `/* */` like Java and C#.

### Using const

The reserved word `const`—short for "constant"—is the alternative to `let`. Variables declared with `const` must be initialized with a value, and can't be reassigned later. Here's an example:

```js
const PI = 3.14159;
```

In modern JavaScript, `const` is the preferred way to declare all variables. You only use `let` when you know the variable needs to be assigned new values, like when the variable serves as a count of something, or a total sum. Otherwise, default to using `const` when declaring a variable. You can always change it to a `let` if needed.

>**⚠ Warning: const doesn't prevent all changes**
>
>When a variable declared with `const` refers to an object, that variable can't be assigned a different value, but the properties of the object it refers to can still be changed.

---

# Data Types

The most important JavaScript data types to be familiar with are:

-   Number
-   String
-   Boolean
-   Object
-   null
-   undefined

>**🛈 Note: JavaScript is a loosely typed language**
>
>If you've used Java or C#, you know that you must provide an explicit data type when declaring variables. This isn't the case in JavaScript. In JavaScript, variables aren't associated with any particular data type when you declare them. This makes JavaScript a **loosely typed language**.
>
>Variables in JavaScript are free to hold any type of value:
>
>```js
>let foo = 42;
>foo = "Steve";
>foo = true;
>```
>
>Variables can be assigned and reassigned values of any data type. `foo` starts as Number, then becomes a String, and ends up a Boolean. Note the `let` declaration so `foo` can be reassigned values.

## Number

The `Number` type is a 64-bit double-precision value, like a `double` in Java or C#. `Number` literals can optionally be preceded by `+` or `-`, and followed by an `e` with a power of 10 to multiply by (as in scientific notation).

Here are some examples:

```js
453
-102
+732123
98.6
-43.45
-2.432e+12
7.01e-8
```

## String

A string is zero or more characters enclosed in double(") or single (') quotation marks:

```js
"foo"
'bar'
'1234'
"Rocket J. Squirrel"
```

The end quotation mark must match the one used at the beginning. In other words, JavaScript won't accept this:

```js
"foo'
'bar"
```

It's possible to embed single quotation (') marks in string enclosed in double quotation (") marks, and double quotation (") marks in a single quotation (') mark string:

```js
"Occam's razor"
'Jamal said, "Hi"'
```

### Special characters in strings

In JavaScript, you can embed special characters into any string:

| **Character** | **Meaning**                         |
| ------------- | ----------------------------------- |
| \\n            | New line                            |
| \\r            | Carriage return                     |
| \\t            | Tab                                 |
| \\'            | Apostrophe or single quotation mark |
| \\"            | Double quotation mark               |
| \\             | Backslash character                 |

```js
"Jamal said, \"Hi\""
'Occam\'s razor'
```

### Concatenation

You can build larger strings from smaller ones in code with **string concatenation** using the concatenation operator, `+`, as you do in Java and C#.

### Template literals

Template literals are strings delimited by back-tick (`)(grave accent) characters rather than single or double quotation marks. In addition to regular strings, template literals can contain placeholders, indicated by a dollar sign and curly braces (${ }).

When properly used, template literals can make your code more readable than concatenating strings:

```js
const firstName = 'Bernice';
const middleInitial = 'B';
const lastName = 'BillingsBottom';

// Display the fullname using concatenation
console.log('LASTNAME: ' + lastName + ', FIRSTNAME: ' + firstName + ' M.I.: ' + middleInitial);

// Display the fullname using template literals
console.log(`LASTNAME: ${lastName}, FIRSTNAME: ${firstName} M.I.: ${middleInitial}`);
```

You can find more information on [template literals](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Template_literals) at the Mozilla Developer Network.

### String length and substrings

Strings have a `.length` property for retrieving their length and a `.substring()` method similar to that in Java and C#:

```js
const fullName = 'John J. Johnson';
const nameLength = fullName.length; // set nameLength to 15
// Copy from the first index up to, but not including the second index:
const firstName = fullName.substring(0, 4); // set firstName to 'John'
// When only one index is specified, copy from that index to the end:
const lastName = fullName.substring(8); // set lastName to 'Johnson'
```

## Boolean

Boolean values have one of two values: `true` or `false`.

>**🛈 Note: Truthy and falsy values**
>
>In boolean contexts, all values in JavaScript are considered `true` or `false`. The values considered false are `0`, `-0`, `''` (empty string), `undefined`, `null`, and `NaN`. All other values are considered true. This means, for example, that the expression `!null` evaluates to `true`.

## Object

Objects in JavaScript are, in their most basic form, collections of key-value pairs. Unlike Java and C#, you don't need to have a class or call a constructor to create an object. Here's an example:

```js
const house = {
    streetAddress: '101 Main Street',
    squareFootage: 2000,
    propertyTaxRate: 2.25,
    isForSale: false
};

console.log('The house at ' + house.streetAddress + ' has an area of ' + house.squareFootage + ' square feet.';
// Outputs 'The house at 100 Main Street has an area of 2000 square feet.'
```

## Undefined

`undefined` is the value assigned to variables that have been declared, but not explicitly assigned a value:

```js
let name; //name has the value undefined
```

## Null

Although `null` and `undefined` are commonly lumped together, there is a difference. `null` represents the intentional absence of any object value. You generally don't set variables to `undefined`, but you can set a variable to `null` rather than an object when there is no appropriate object for it to refer to.

---

# Operators and Arithmetic

JavaScript provides `+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, and `%` arithmetic operators, like Java and C#.

Also like Java and C#, the order of the operators isn't always from left to right. You can see the full table of [operator precedence](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Operator_Precedence) on the Mozilla Developer Network.

## Shorthand assignment operators

Closely associated with basic arithmetic are the shorthand assignments operators (`+=`, `-=`, `*=`, `/=`, and `%=`). You've seen these in Java and C#, and they work the same way in JavaScript.

---

# Type Conversion

The Number object has several useful functions that can help you convert strings to numbers or numbers to strings.

>**🛈 Note: Methods are functions**
>
>JavaScript refers to methods as functions. The terms are commonly used interchangeably.

## Number to string

### The `toString()` method

Any number has access to the built-in Number object's `toString()` method:

```js
Number.toString(radix)
```

Radix is another way of saying "number base." It's optional, and if not given, defaults to your everyday base-10 number base.

Then again, there are times when you need to deal with numbers in terms the computer uses: base-2 (binary), and base-16 (hexadecimal). That's when you want to use the radix:

```js
const numberOfMonkeys = 11;
const avgMonkeyWeight = 22.75;                      // Approximation after a 2 minute read of a Wikipedia article
console.log(numberOfMonkeys.toString());            // '11'
console.log(avgMonkeyWeight);                       // '22.75'
console.log((83).toString());                       // '83', note the use of parenthesis around the numeric literal 83
console.log((3.14).toString());                     // '3.14', parentheses are also needed on literal floating-point numbers
console.log(numberOfMonkeys.toString(2));           // '1011', 11 is displayed as a binary number (radix: 2)
console.log((4 * numberOfMonkeys).toString(16));    // '2c', 44 (4 * numberOfMonkeys) is displayed as hexadecimal number (radix: 16)
```

### The `toFixed()` method

Another Number method to know, especially when dealing with money values, is `toFixed()`:

```js
Number.toFixed(digits)
```

Like `toString()`, `toFixed()` returns a string version of a number. The difference is you get to control the number of digits after the decimal point to include in the string, which is why it's useful in terms of money values:

```js
const costOfMeal = 83.50;
const numberOfDiners = 7;
const sharePerPerson = costOfMeal / numberOfDiners; // Result: 11.928571428571429
const toThePennyShare = sharePerPerson.toFixed(2);  // Result: '11.93' (digits: 2)
```

## String to number

There are two options for converting, or parsing a string into a number: `parseInt()` and `parseFloat()`:

```js
Number.parseInt(string)
Number.parseFloat(string)
```

`parseFloat()` converts a string to a decimal value; `parseInt()` converts a string to an integer value.

```js
const myDecimal = Number.parseFloat('98.6'); // Result: 98.6
const myInteger = Number.parseInt('98.6'); // Result: 98
```

## `NaN`

There is one potential issue that exists when parsing strings. It's always possible that the string you attempt to parse can't be converted into a number. In these cases, JavaScript returns `NaN` (Not-a-Number):

```js
const k9 = Number.parseInt('dog');                      // Result: NaN, 'dog' cannot be parsed into an integer
const nineLives = Number.parseFloat('cat');             // Result: NaN, 'cat' fares no better, even as a decimal number
const surprise = Number.parseInt('1234 Test Drive');    // Result: 1234, surprisingly, parse will parse what it can
const noSurprise = Number.parseInt('West 1234 Test');   // Result: NaN, parse quits on first sign of trouble
```

`NaN` isn't limited solely to JavaScript. The idea of a value not being a number originated with floating-point numbers. See [Wikipedia: NaN](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NaN) for more information.# Type Conversion

The Number object has several useful functions that can help you convert strings to numbers or numbers to strings.

>**🛈 Note: Methods are functions**
>
>JavaScript refers to methods as functions. The terms are commonly used interchangeably.

## Number to string

### The `toString()` method

Any number has access to the built-in Number object's `toString()` method:

```js
Number.toString(radix)
```

Radix is another way of saying "number base." It's optional, and if not given, defaults to your everyday base-10 number base.

Then again, there are times when you need to deal with numbers in terms the computer uses: base-2 (binary), and base-16 (hexadecimal). That's when you want to use the radix:

```js
const numberOfMonkeys = 11;
const avgMonkeyWeight = 22.75;                      // Approximation after a 2 minute read of a Wikipedia article
console.log(numberOfMonkeys.toString());            // '11'
console.log(avgMonkeyWeight);                       // '22.75'
console.log((83).toString());                       // '83', note the use of parenthesis around the numeric literal 83
console.log((3.14).toString());                     // '3.14', parentheses are also needed on literal floating-point numbers
console.log(numberOfMonkeys.toString(2));           // '1011', 11 is displayed as a binary number (radix: 2)
console.log((4 * numberOfMonkeys).toString(16));    // '2c', 44 (4 * numberOfMonkeys) is displayed as hexadecimal number (radix: 16)
```

### The `toFixed()` method

Another Number method to know, especially when dealing with money values, is `toFixed()`:

```js
Number.toFixed(digits)
```

Like `toString()`, `toFixed()` returns a string version of a number. The difference is you get to control the number of digits after the decimal point to include in the string, which is why it's useful in terms of money values:

```js
const costOfMeal = 83.50;
const numberOfDiners = 7;
const sharePerPerson = costOfMeal / numberOfDiners; // Result: 11.928571428571429
const toThePennyShare = sharePerPerson.toFixed(2);  // Result: '11.93' (digits: 2)
```

## String to number

There are two options for converting, or parsing a string into a number: `parseInt()` and `parseFloat()`:

```js
Number.parseInt(string)
Number.parseFloat(string)
```

`parseFloat()` converts a string to a decimal value; `parseInt()` converts a string to an integer value.

```js
const myDecimal = Number.parseFloat('98.6'); // Result: 98.6
const myInteger = Number.parseInt('98.6'); // Result: 98
```

## `NaN`

There is one potential issue that exists when parsing strings. It's always possible that the string you attempt to parse can't be converted into a number. In these cases, JavaScript returns `NaN` (Not-a-Number):

```js
const k9 = Number.parseInt('dog');                      // Result: NaN, 'dog' cannot be parsed into an integer
const nineLives = Number.parseFloat('cat');             // Result: NaN, 'cat' fares no better, even as a decimal number
const surprise = Number.parseInt('1234 Test Drive');    // Result: 1234, surprisingly, parse will parse what it can
const noSurprise = Number.parseInt('West 1234 Test');   // Result: NaN, parse quits on first sign of trouble
```

`NaN` isn't limited solely to JavaScript. The idea of a value not being a number originated with floating-point numbers. See [Wikipedia: NaN](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NaN) for more information.

---

# Logical Branching

## Boolean expressions

As you already know, boolean expressions evaluate to `true` or `false`. There are two common ways that boolean expressions are built:

-   Comparison operators (to compare two values)
-   Logical operators (to create relationships between one or more boolean values)

### Comparison operators

In addition to the relational operators (`>`, `<`, `>=`, `<=`) matching those in Java and C#, JavaScript has four equality operators:

| **Operator** | **Meaning**           |
| ------------ | --------------------- |
| `==`         | Equal To              |
| `===`        | Strictly equal to     |
| `!=`           | Not Equal To          |
| `!==`        | Strictly not equal to |

The equality (`==`) and inequality (`!=`) operators attempt to convert operands of different types before comparing them, while the strict versions require values to be the same type to be considered equal:

```js
5 == 5;  // true
5 == '5'; // true
5 === 5; // true
5 === '5'; // false
```

### Logical operators

The logical operators are AND (`&&`), OR (`||`), and NOT (`!`). These operators are used with boolean values to create boolean expressions the same way they're used in Java or C#.

## Conditional code

JavaScript includes an `if` statement for logical branching that works the same way an `if` statement does in Java or C#:

```js
if (condition) {

} else if (condition) {

} else {

}
```

The condition specified for the `if` may be a boolean expression or any other truthy or falsy value:

```js
if (100) {
    // The code here will be executed because 100 is a truthy value.
}
```

## Blocks and scope

JavaScript handles blocks and scope mostly the same way that Java and C# do:

```js
{ //outer block
    let i;
    { //inner block
        let j;
    }
}
```

The variable `j` has the scope of the inner block. Statements within the inner block can use both `i` and `j`. Statements in the outer block can only use `i`.

One difference from Java and C# is that JavaScript allows a variable in an inner block to have the same name as a variable in an outer block. These are then two separate variables:

```js
{
    let i = 3;
    {
        let i = 29;  // <-- This is a new variable
        console.log(i);  // <-- Will print 29
    }
    console.log(i); // <-- Back to the original variable, will print 3
}
```

This overlapping of variables is called **shadowing**. The inner scope variable "shadows" the outer scope.

>**🛈 Warning: Avoid variable shadowing**
>
>Shadowing can lead to bugs that are difficult to spot and frequently makes it hard to understand the intent of the code. As a best practice, avoid shadowing, and make sure to uniquely name each variable.

---

# Arrays

## Declaring and initializing an array

Here's the syntax for declaring and initializing a new empty array:

```js
const testScores = [];
```

If you know the values of your array, you can provide those values at the time of initialization:

```js
const testScores = [ 85, 96, 80, 98, 89, 70, 93, 84, 66, 96 ];
```

## Accessing elements within an array

You access a particular element in an array or assign to it a new value the same way you would in Java or C#:

```js
    const testScores = [ 85, 96, 80, 98, 89, 70, 93, 84, 66, 96 ];

    testScores[0] = 82; // update the value at index 0 to 82
    testScores[1] = 72; // update the value at index 1 to 72
    testScores[4] = 80; // update the value at index 4 to 80

    const highScore = testScores[3]; //set highScore to 98
```

## Determining the length of an array

Each array has a property, `.length`, that allows you to retrieve the size of the given array:

```js
    const size = testScores.length;
```

As in Java or C#, that property is often used in conjunction with `for` loops (discussed later in this unit) and when referencing the last value:

```js
const testScores = [90, 85, 70, 55, 70, 75, 95, 100];

const lastValue = testScores[testScores.length - 1];
const secondToLastValue = testScores[testScores.length - 2];
```

## Useful array functions

JavaScript arrays have many useful built-in functions. You can find documentation on them at [the MDN site on Arrays](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array) .

### `push()`

The `push()` function adds a new element to the end of an array:

```js
let numbers = [1, 2, 3];
numbers.push(4);
// numbers is now [1, 2, 3, 4]
```

### `unshift()`

The `unshift()` function adds a new element to the beginning of an array:

```js
let numbers = [2, 3, 4];
numbers.unshift(1);
// numbers is now [1, 2, 3, 4];
```

### `pop()`

The `pop()` function is related to the `push()` function. `pop()` removes an element from the end of the array. It also returns the element that was removed:

```js
let numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4];
let removedElement = numbers.pop();
// numbers now is [1, 2, 3];
// removedElement is 4;
```

### `shift()`

The `shift()` function is related to the `unshift()` function. `shift()` removes an element from the beginning of the array. It also returns the element that was removed:

```js
let numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4];
let removedElement = numbers.shift();
// numbers now is [2, 3, 4];
// removedElement is 1;
```

### `includes()`

The `includes()` function checks if a given value is in an array. It won't tell you how many times it's in the array, but it does return `true` if it found the value at all or `false` if it isn't found:

```js
let numbers = [1, 2, 3];
let foundThree = numbers.includes(3); // foundThree will be true
let foundFour = numbers.includes(4); // foundFour will be false
```

### `indexOf()`

The `indexOf()` function finds the location of a value in an array. It finds the first instance of the value and then returns the index to that element. If it can't find the value, it returns `-1`:

```js
let numbers = ['one', 'two', 'three', 'four', 'three', 'five', 'three'];
let indexOfThree = numbers.indexOf('three'); // indexOfThree will be 2, the index of the first 'three'
let indexOfSix = numbers.indexOf('six'); // indexOfSix will be -1
```

### `lastIndexOf()`

The `lastIndexOf()` function finds the last location of a value in an array. It finds the last instance of a value and then returns the index to that element. If it can't find the value, it returns `-1`:

```js
let numbers = ['one', 'two', 'three', 'four', 'three', 'five', 'three'];
let indexOfThree = numbers.lastIndexOf('three'); // indexOfThree will be 6, the index of the last 'three'
let indexOfSix = numbers.lastIndexOf('six'); // indexOfSix will be -1
```

### `join()`

The `join()` function accepts an array and returns a string, putting a value in between every element. The array itself doesn't change:

```js
let numbers = [1, 2, 3];
let joinedNumbers = numbers.join(';');
// joinedNumbers is "1;2;3"
```

### `reverse()`

The `reverse()` function reverses the array, making the first element the last and the last element first, and reversing everything in between too. It reverses the array in place, changing the original:

```js
let numbers = [1, 2, 3];
numbers.reverse();
// numbers is [3, 2, 1];
```

---

# Loops

## `for` loops

The JavaScript `for` loop has the same syntax as a `for` loop in Java or C#:

```js
for (initializer; condition; iterator) {
    //body
}
```

Here's an example `for` loop:

```js
let sum = 0; // the sum of all our scores

for(let i = 0; i < testScores.length; i++) {
    sum = sum + testScores[i];  // add each score to the sum
}

const average = sum / testScores.length;
```

## `for...of` loops

The JavaScript equivalent to a Java or C# foreach loop is a `for...of` loop:

```js
for (variable of iterable) {
    //body
}
```

Here's an example:

```js
let sum = 0;

for (const score of testScores) {
    sum += score;
}

const average = sum / testScores.length;
```

## `while` and `do...while` loops

JavaScript also has the same syntax as Java and C# for `while` and `do...while` loops:

```js
while (condition) {
    //body (which never runs if condition is false or a falsy value)
}

do {
    //body (which always runs at least once)
} while (condition);
```

---

# Running JavaScript

While JavaScript is run in many contexts these days, the original, and still the most common way to run JavaScript, is in a web browser. One of the core components of a modern web browser is a **JavaScript engine**, which is a program that executes JavaScript code.

You use the `<script>` HTML element to embed JavaScript into a web page so it's run by the browser.

JavaScript code can be included directly within the `<script>` element, like this:

```js
<script>
    const message = 'Hello browser!';
    console.log(message);
</script>
```

Or, JavaScript code in a separate file can be loaded like this:

```js
<script src="my-amazing-script.js"></script>
```

---

# Unit Summary

In this unit you were introduced to the basics of JavaScript, including:

-   How to declare variables with `let` and `const`
-   The most important data types: `Number`, `String`, `Boolean`, `Object`, `null`, and `undefined`
-   Truthy values and falsy values
-   Functions for working with strings and arrays
-   The equality and strict equality operators
-   Syntax for writing `for`, `for...of`, and `while` loops
-   How to embed JavaScript in HTML so it runs in a browser

## Further reading

-   [Wikipedia: ECMAScript](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ECMAScript) Good overview and brief history of EMCAScript.
-   [What is the difference between JavaScript and ECMAScript?](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/912479/what-is-the-difference-between-javascript-and-ecmascript/913064) Contains a short history of JavaScript and ECMAScript, their share past, and possible future.  
    
-   [What every JavaScript developer should know about Unicode](https://dmitripavlutin.com/what-every-javascript-developer-should-know-about-unicode/) A nice introduction to Unicode, and the basic use of it within JavaScript.
-   [FreeCodeCamp: JavaScript type coercion explained](https://medium.freecodecamp.org/js-type-coercion-explained-27ba3d9a2839)
-   [Round to at most 2 decimal places only if necessary](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/11832914/round-to-at-most-2-decimal-places-only-if-necessary)
-   [Google JavaScript Style Guide](https://google.github.io/styleguide/jsguide.html)
-   [13 Noteworthy Points from Google’s JavaScript Style Guide](https://medium.freecodecamp.org/google-publishes-a-javascript-style-guide-here-are-some-key-lessons-1810b8ad050b)
-   [Why are shortcuts like x += y considered good practice?](https://softwareengineering.stackexchange.com/questions/134118/why-are-shortcuts-like-x-y-considered-good-practice) Interesting takes on why short assignment operators are considered best practice.

---

# Quiz

## **Intro to JavaScript 1**

**Which element is used to add JavaScript to a web page?**

○ `<head>`

◉ `<script>`

○ `<link>`

○ `<js>`

**Explanation:** JavaScript can be enclosed within the `script` element or loaded from a separate file by specifying its location as the value of the `src` attribute.


## **Intro to JavaScript 2**

**True or False: When JavaScript is included in a web page, it runs on the web server hosting that page.**

○ True

◉ False

**Explanation:** When JavaScript is included in a web page, it runs in the browser.


## **Intro to JavaScript 3**

**Which statement creates the `number` variable so that it's changeable and holds the value 5?**

○ `var number = 5;`

○ `int number = 5;`

◉ `let number = 5;`

○ `const number = 5;`

**Explanation:** Use `let` to declare a variable that needs to have different values assigned to it or `const` if it only needs to be assigned once.


## **Intro to JavaScript 4**

**JavaScript is a loosely typed language.**

◉ True

○ False

**Explanation:** In JavaScript, variables can be assigned and reassigned values of any data type.


## **Intro to JavaScript 5**

**What's the value of the `result` variable?**

```js
const x = 5;
const y = '5';

const result = (x == y);
```

**Answer:** `True`

**Explanation:** The equality (`==`) and inequality (`!=`) operators attempt to convert operands of different types before comparing them.


## **Intro to JavaScript 6**

**Which of these statements creates an array?**

	Select all correct options

■ `let words = [];`

□ `let words = ('Happy', 'Birthday');`

■ `let words = ['Happy', 'Birthday'];`

□ `let words = {'Happy', 'Birthday'};`

**Explanation:** `[]` is an empty array. `['Happy', 'Birthday']` is an array containing two strings.


## **Intro to JavaScript 7**

**What's the value of the `result` variable?**

```js
const x = 6;
const y = '6';

const result = (x === y);
```

**Answer:** `False`

**Explanation:** Expressions using the strict equality (`===`) and inequality (`!==`) operators evaluate to `false` if the values being compared are different data types.


## **Intro to JavaScript 8**

**The following code snippet fails when executed. Which line causes the error?**

```js
const numbers = [3, 5, 7];  // Line 1
const sum = 0;           // Line 2

for (let i = 0; i < numbers.length; i++) {  // Line 3
    sum += numbers[i];        // Line 4
}

console.log(sum);       // Line 5
```

○ Line 1

○ Line 2

○ Line 3

◉ Line 4

○ Line 5

**Explanation:** `sum` is a `const`. An exception is thrown when the code on line 4 attempts to assign it a new value.
