# Data Types

The most important JavaScript data types to be familiar with are:

-   Number
-   String
-   Boolean
-   Object
-   null
-   undefined

>**🛈 Note: JavaScript is a loosely typed language**
>
>If you've used Java or C#, you know that you must provide an explicit data type when declaring variables. This isn't the case in JavaScript. In JavaScript, variables aren't associated with any particular data type when you declare them. This makes JavaScript a **loosely typed language**.
>
>Variables in JavaScript are free to hold any type of value:
>
>```js
>let foo = 42;
>foo = "Steve";
>foo = true;
>```
>
>Variables can be assigned and reassigned values of any data type. `foo` starts as Number, then becomes a String, and ends up a Boolean. Note the `let` declaration so `foo` can be reassigned values.

## Number

The `Number` type is a 64-bit double-precision value, like a `double` in Java or C#. `Number` literals can optionally be preceded by `+` or `-`, and followed by an `e` with a power of 10 to multiply by (as in scientific notation).

Here are some examples:

```js
453
-102
+732123
98.6
-43.45
-2.432e+12
7.01e-8
```

## String

A string is zero or more characters enclosed in double(") or single (') quotation marks:

```js
"foo"
'bar'
'1234'
"Rocket J. Squirrel"
```

The end quotation mark must match the one used at the beginning. In other words, JavaScript won't accept this:

```js
"foo'
'bar"
```

It's possible to embed single quotation (') marks in string enclosed in double quotation (") marks, and double quotation (") marks in a single quotation (') mark string:

```js
"Occam's razor"
'Jamal said, "Hi"'
```

### Special characters in strings

In JavaScript, you can embed special characters into any string:

| **Character** | **Meaning**                         |
| ------------- | ----------------------------------- |
| \\n            | New line                            |
| \\r            | Carriage return                     |
| \\t            | Tab                                 |
| \\'            | Apostrophe or single quotation mark |
| \\"            | Double quotation mark               |
| \\             | Backslash character                 |

```js
"Jamal said, \"Hi\""
'Occam\'s razor'
```

### Concatenation

You can build larger strings from smaller ones in code with **string concatenation** using the concatenation operator, `+`, as you do in Java and C#.

### Template literals

Template literals are strings delimited by back-tick (`)(grave accent) characters rather than single or double quotation marks. In addition to regular strings, template literals can contain placeholders, indicated by a dollar sign and curly braces (${ }).

When properly used, template literals can make your code more readable than concatenating strings:

```js
const firstName = 'Bernice';
const middleInitial = 'B';
const lastName = 'BillingsBottom';

// Display the fullname using concatenation
console.log('LASTNAME: ' + lastName + ', FIRSTNAME: ' + firstName + ' M.I.: ' + middleInitial);

// Display the fullname using template literals
console.log(`LASTNAME: ${lastName}, FIRSTNAME: ${firstName} M.I.: ${middleInitial}`);
```

You can find more information on [template literals](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Template_literals) at the Mozilla Developer Network.

### String length and substrings

Strings have a `.length` property for retrieving their length and a `.substring()` method similar to that in Java and C#:

```js
const fullName = 'John J. Johnson';
const nameLength = fullName.length; // set nameLength to 15
// Copy from the first index up to, but not including the second index:
const firstName = fullName.substring(0, 4); // set firstName to 'John'
// When only one index is specified, copy from that index to the end:
const lastName = fullName.substring(8); // set lastName to 'Johnson'
```

## Boolean

Boolean values have one of two values: `true` or `false`.

>**🛈 Note: Truthy and falsy values**
>
>In boolean contexts, all values in JavaScript are considered `true` or `false`. The values considered false are `0`, `-0`, `''` (empty string), `undefined`, `null`, and `NaN`. All other values are considered true. This means, for example, that the expression `!null` evaluates to `true`.

## Object

Objects in JavaScript are, in their most basic form, collections of key-value pairs. Unlike Java and C#, you don't need to have a class or call a constructor to create an object. Here's an example:

```js
const house = {
    streetAddress: '101 Main Street',
    squareFootage: 2000,
    propertyTaxRate: 2.25,
    isForSale: false
};

console.log('The house at ' + house.streetAddress + ' has an area of ' + house.squareFootage + ' square feet.';
// Outputs 'The house at 100 Main Street has an area of 2000 square feet.'
```

## Undefined

`undefined` is the value assigned to variables that have been declared, but not explicitly assigned a value:

```js
let name; //name has the value undefined
```

## Null

Although `null` and `undefined` are commonly lumped together, there is a difference. `null` represents the intentional absence of any object value. You generally don't set variables to `undefined`, but you can set a variable to `null` rather than an object when there is no appropriate object for it to refer to.