# Quiz

## **Intro to JavaScript 1**

**Which element is used to add JavaScript to a web page?**

○ `<head>`

◉ `<script>`

○ `<link>`

○ `<js>`

**Explanation:** JavaScript can be enclosed within the `script` element or loaded from a separate file by specifying its location as the value of the `src` attribute.


## **Intro to JavaScript 2**

**True or False: When JavaScript is included in a web page, it runs on the web server hosting that page.**

○ True

◉ False

**Explanation:** When JavaScript is included in a web page, it runs in the browser.


## **Intro to JavaScript 3**

**Which statement creates the `number` variable so that it's changeable and holds the value 5?**

○ `var number = 5;`

○ `int number = 5;`

◉ `let number = 5;`

○ `const number = 5;`

**Explanation:** Use `let` to declare a variable that needs to have different values assigned to it or `const` if it only needs to be assigned once.


## **Intro to JavaScript 4**

**JavaScript is a loosely typed language.**

◉ True

○ False

**Explanation:** In JavaScript, variables can be assigned and reassigned values of any data type.


## **Intro to JavaScript 5**

**What's the value of the `result` variable?**

```js
const x = 5;
const y = '5';

const result = (x == y);
```

**Answer:** `True`

**Explanation:** The equality (`==`) and inequality (`!=`) operators attempt to convert operands of different types before comparing them.


## **Intro to JavaScript 6**

**Which of these statements creates an array?**

	Select all correct options

■ `let words = [];`

□ `let words = ('Happy', 'Birthday');`

■ `let words = ['Happy', 'Birthday'];`

□ `let words = {'Happy', 'Birthday'};`

**Explanation:** `[]` is an empty array. `['Happy', 'Birthday']` is an array containing two strings.


## **Intro to JavaScript 7**

**What's the value of the `result` variable?**

```js
const x = 6;
const y = '6';

const result = (x === y);
```

**Answer:** `False`

**Explanation:** Expressions using the strict equality (`===`) and inequality (`!==`) operators evaluate to `false` if the values being compared are different data types.


## **Intro to JavaScript 8**

**The following code snippet fails when executed. Which line causes the error?**

```js
const numbers = [3, 5, 7];  // Line 1
const sum = 0;           // Line 2

for (let i = 0; i < numbers.length; i++) {  // Line 3
    sum += numbers[i];        // Line 4
}

console.log(sum);       // Line 5
```

○ Line 1

○ Line 2

○ Line 3

◉ Line 4

○ Line 5

**Explanation:** `sum` is a `const`. An exception is thrown when the code on line 4 attempts to assign it a new value.
