# Introduction to Visual Studio Code

Visual Studio Code—also referred to as VS Code—is a free, lightweight, source code editor from Microsoft. It runs on Windows, macOS, and Linux, and supports several languages like JavaScript, CSS, and HTML. Support for many other languages can be added on through extensions. It's a popular choice among programmers in general, and is widely used in web development.

As a developer, you'll use several of VS Code's key features:

-   Projects
-   Terminal
-   Extensions

## Launching VS Code

To open VS Code, you can click on the VS Code icon from where you normally launch applications, like the Windows Start menu or macOS Applications folder. This launches the application, however, nothing is opened.

You can open and close individual files, but VS Code works best when you have a project open. You'll learn what projects are and how to open them in the next lesson.

---

# Projects

A **project** is a fundamental concept in programming. A modern application consists of multiple resources: source code files, libraries, graphics, sounds, and build and run instructions. A project brings all these things together into a single container, typically gathered under a **project folder**.

Full-featured IDEs like Visual Studio and IntelliJ have configuration files and specific folder structures to define individual projects. VS Code, on the other hand, has a lightweight, ad-hoc approach. Opening a folder in VS Code indicates it's a project. Essentially, VS Code treats any _opened_ folder as a project folder.

## Opening a project folder

There are three ways to open a project in VS Code: in the application itself, in the File Explorer, or from the command line.

### Opening a project directly in VS Code

You can directly open a project within VS Code. Click **File > Open Folder...** and navigate to the folder you wish to open as a project.

If a project is already opened, it's closed, and the newly selected folder is opened. If there are any unsaved changes in the already opened folder, you're prompted to save them before it's closed.

### Opening a project in the File Explorer

Another way to open a project is to navigate to the project folder within the File Explorer, right-click it, and click **Open with Code**. This launches VS Code and opens the project folder in it.

## Opening a project at the command line

You can also open VS Code from a command line. Navigate to the project folder using `cd`, and then enter this command:

```
code .
```

The `.` in the command means the current directory, so the command opens VS Code and loads the current directory as the project folder.

## Closing a project folder

To close a project, click **File > Close Folder**. If there are any unsaved changes, you're prompted to save them before the folder is closed.

---

# Terminal

VS Code comes with a built-in terminal that you can use to run commands in your project folder, such as `npm`. VS Code's terminal supports Bash, PowerShell, and Windows Command Prompt.

PowerShell is the default terminal shell in VS Code, but this guide assumes Bash is already set up as your default shell.

## Launching a new terminal

To launch a new terminal, click **Terminal > New Terminal**.

### Multiple terminals

You can run multiple terminals simultaneously. They can even be different shells. For example, you could have Bash in one terminal, and PowerShell in another. Every new terminal is a separate process.

You can launch another terminal by using the same menu option **Terminal > New Terminal**, or you can click the "+" symbol in the Terminal window after you've launched the first one.

Depending on the version of VS Code installed, you may see either a drop-down or a sidebar that appears as part of the terminal panel. This allows you to switch between running terminals.

If you're running the version with a drop-down, you'll see it with the title of `1:bash`. The second one you launch says `2:bash`.

If you're running the version with the sidebar, it appears once you have more than one terminal launched. The terminals appear in a list in the sidebar. The terminals aren't numbered. Instead, they appear in the order they were launched.

## Hiding and revealing the terminal panel

To hide the terminal panel, click the "X" in the far upper-right corner of the terminal panel.

To reveal the terminal panel, click **View > Terminal**. If no terminal is running, a new terminal is launched.

>⚠ **Warning: Hiding the terminal panel doesn't stop the terminal process**
>
>Hiding the terminal panel doesn't stop the terminal process. It only hides the panel. The terminal process, and any other background tasks, continue to run.

## Stopping the terminal process

To stop the terminal process, you can click the garbage can icon 🗑. It appears next to the drop-down or in the sidebar when you hold the cursor on the shell name.

You can also type the command `exit` to close a terminal window.

---

# Extensions

Extensions are extra pieces of software that augment another program's behavior, often written by an author who didn't write the original software. Extensions are installed and updated separately from the main program.

VS Code has many extensions that add features like a local web server, support for other programming languages, and code formatting. At the time of this writing, the VS Code Extensions Marketplace has over 20,000 extensions. There are several extensions that'll help you with your work in this curriculum. You may already have them installed.

## Managing installed extensions

To view your installed extensions, click **File > Preferences > Extensions**.

The installed extensions appear in the **Extensions** panel on the left, under the **Installed** label. You can expand and collapse the list by clicking on the label.

When you select an extension in the list, it displays that extension's details in the center panel to the right. You can read the extension's README or view the latest updates to the extension.

You can uninstall the extension on the details page using the **Uninstall** button. If you want to deactivate an extension without uninstalling it, you can use the **Disable** button. These actions are also available when you click the gear icon next to the extension name.

You can access an extension's settings by clicking on the gear icon associated with the extension in the list. Alternatively, you can go to the extension's details page and then click the **Extension Settings** item in the context menu.

## Installing an extension

To begin installing an extension, you must first locate it in the Extensions Marketplace. Click **File > Preferences > Extensions** to display the **Extension** panel, and then enter any keywords, or the name of the extension if you know it, in the "Search Extensions in Marketplace" textbox. Matching extensions are found as you type. There's no need to press the enter key.

You may install any extension found by clicking the **Install** button associated with it, or by clicking the extension to display the details page and installing from there.

Once the extension is installed, you can follow the instructions discussed in the [Managing installed extensions](https://lms.techelevator.com/cohorts/199/blocks/5/content_files/vscode/04-extensions.md#managing-installed-extensions) section.

Clear the search textbox when done to return to the list of installed extensions.

---

# Verifying installation

To confirm you have VS Code installed on your computer, run this command:

```
code --version
```

That outputs several lines of information like this:

```
1.54.3
2b9aebd5354a3629c3aba0a5f5df49f43d6689f8
x64
```

The first line (in this example `1.54.3`) is the version number. As long as the combined major.minor version is `1.51` or higher, you're all set.

You can also confirm the VS Code extensions installed by running this command:

```
code --list-extensions
```

The output may list several extensions and look something like this:

```
dbaeumer.vscode-eslint
octref.vetur
ritwickdey.LiveServer
```