# Projects

A **project** is a fundamental concept in programming. A modern application consists of multiple resources: source code files, libraries, graphics, sounds, and build and run instructions. A project brings all these things together into a single container, typically gathered under a **project folder**.

Full-featured IDEs like Visual Studio and IntelliJ have configuration files and specific folder structures to define individual projects. VS Code, on the other hand, has a lightweight, ad-hoc approach. Opening a folder in VS Code indicates it's a project. Essentially, VS Code treats any _opened_ folder as a project folder.

## Opening a project folder

There are three ways to open a project in VS Code: in the application itself, in the File Explorer, or from the command line.

### Opening a project directly in VS Code

You can directly open a project within VS Code. Click **File > Open Folder...** and navigate to the folder you wish to open as a project.

If a project is already opened, it's closed, and the newly selected folder is opened. If there are any unsaved changes in the already opened folder, you're prompted to save them before it's closed.

### Opening a project in the File Explorer

Another way to open a project is to navigate to the project folder within the File Explorer, right-click it, and click **Open with Code**. This launches VS Code and opens the project folder in it.

## Opening a project at the command line

You can also open VS Code from a command line. Navigate to the project folder using `cd`, and then enter this command:

```
code .
```

The `.` in the command means the current directory, so the command opens VS Code and loads the current directory as the project folder.

## Closing a project folder

To close a project, click **File > Close Folder**. If there are any unsaved changes, you're prompted to save them before the folder is closed.