# Extensions

Extensions are extra pieces of software that augment another program's behavior, often written by an author who didn't write the original software. Extensions are installed and updated separately from the main program.

VS Code has many extensions that add features like a local web server, support for other programming languages, and code formatting. At the time of this writing, the VS Code Extensions Marketplace has over 20,000 extensions. There are several extensions that'll help you with your work in this curriculum. You may already have them installed.

## Managing installed extensions

To view your installed extensions, click **File > Preferences > Extensions**.

The installed extensions appear in the **Extensions** panel on the left, under the **Installed** label. You can expand and collapse the list by clicking on the label.

When you select an extension in the list, it displays that extension's details in the center panel to the right. You can read the extension's README or view the latest updates to the extension.

You can uninstall the extension on the details page using the **Uninstall** button. If you want to deactivate an extension without uninstalling it, you can use the **Disable** button. These actions are also available when you click the gear icon next to the extension name.

You can access an extension's settings by clicking on the gear icon associated with the extension in the list. Alternatively, you can go to the extension's details page and then click the **Extension Settings** item in the context menu.

## Installing an extension

To begin installing an extension, you must first locate it in the Extensions Marketplace. Click **File > Preferences > Extensions** to display the **Extension** panel, and then enter any keywords, or the name of the extension if you know it, in the "Search Extensions in Marketplace" textbox. Matching extensions are found as you type. There's no need to press the enter key.

You may install any extension found by clicking the **Install** button associated with it, or by clicking the extension to display the details page and installing from there.

Once the extension is installed, you can follow the instructions discussed in the [Managing installed extensions](https://lms.techelevator.com/cohorts/199/blocks/5/content_files/vscode/04-extensions.md#managing-installed-extensions) section.

Clear the search textbox when done to return to the list of installed extensions.