# Terminal

VS Code comes with a built-in terminal that you can use to run commands in your project folder, such as `npm`. VS Code's terminal supports Bash, PowerShell, and Windows Command Prompt.

PowerShell is the default terminal shell in VS Code, but this guide assumes Bash is already set up as your default shell.

## Launching a new terminal

To launch a new terminal, click **Terminal > New Terminal**.

### Multiple terminals

You can run multiple terminals simultaneously. They can even be different shells. For example, you could have Bash in one terminal, and PowerShell in another. Every new terminal is a separate process.

You can launch another terminal by using the same menu option **Terminal > New Terminal**, or you can click the "+" symbol in the Terminal window after you've launched the first one.

Depending on the version of VS Code installed, you may see either a drop-down or a sidebar that appears as part of the terminal panel. This allows you to switch between running terminals.

If you're running the version with a drop-down, you'll see it with the title of `1:bash`. The second one you launch says `2:bash`.

If you're running the version with the sidebar, it appears once you have more than one terminal launched. The terminals appear in a list in the sidebar. The terminals aren't numbered. Instead, they appear in the order they were launched.

## Hiding and revealing the terminal panel

To hide the terminal panel, click the "X" in the far upper-right corner of the terminal panel.

To reveal the terminal panel, click **View > Terminal**. If no terminal is running, a new terminal is launched.

>⚠ **Warning: Hiding the terminal panel doesn't stop the terminal process**
>
>Hiding the terminal panel doesn't stop the terminal process. It only hides the panel. The terminal process, and any other background tasks, continue to run.

## Stopping the terminal process

To stop the terminal process, you can click the garbage can icon 🗑. It appears next to the drop-down or in the sidebar when you hold the cursor on the shell name.

You can also type the command `exit` to close a terminal window.